--- Page 1 ---

Chapter 17
Tokenized and Non-tokenized Assets: 
Legal Considerations
Brett Cotler
Abstract
This chapter discusses legal considerations relating to digital assets. The legal 
aspects of tokenized and non-tokenized assets are evolving. Although some 
states have enacted specific laws or regulations for digital assets, Congress 
and federal agencies have been slower to craft specific rules and regulations 
for such assets. As a result, regulators, such as the Securities and Exchange 
Commission, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and Internal Rev­
enue Service, and market participants must apply existing guidance to digital 
assets. This chapter examines applying specific aspects of federal securities 
and tax law to digital assets. It also discusses general business law considera­
tions for blockchain and cyber enterprises. The discussion of state law ap­
plications centers on the New York Virtual Currency License and Wyoming 
and Delaware crypto initiatives. This chapter does not provide a compre­
hensive review of all legal issues related to cryptocurrency. Each legal issue 
about cryptocurrency is complex and requires separate analyses.
Keywords: Digital assets; tokenized assets; non-tokenized assets; 
federal securities law; tax law; blockchain
Introduction
Before discussing the law, understanding the “who, what, when, where, and why” 
of a digital asset is paramount. Investors should know what they are entitled 
to receive. Issuers need to understand their obligations to regulators and inves­
tors. Understanding the facts involves several lines of inquiry: (1) the parties (the 
“who” and “where”); (2) tokenomics (the “why”); (3) marketing and offering 
(the “how,” “when,” and “where”); (4) business structuring considerations (the 
“what”), and (5) whether the parties kept their promises.
The Emerald Handbook on Cryptoassets: Investment Opportunities and Challenges, 249–263
Copyright © 2023 by Emerald Publishing Limited
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved
doi:10.1108/978-1-80455-320-620221017


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 2 ---

250     Brett Cotler
The first section describes the various parties of a business transaction involv­
ing digital assets, followed by fundamental business questions about digital assets. 
The following sections discuss securities law considerations, specifically offering 
and marketing digital assets, business structuring and tax considerations, and New 
York and Wyoming digital asset regulations. The final section provides a summary 
and conclusions.
Who are the Players?
The first step in understanding digital assets, specifically tokenized and non-
tokenized assets, is knowing the main parties. This task involves asking the fol­
lowing questions.
⦁
⦁Who or what is creating and issuing the digital asset?
⦁
⦁Does the issuer have a legal personality or is the token issuer a decentralized 
non-entity?
⦁
⦁In what jurisdictions are the token issuer and its sponsor incorporated or 
resident?
⦁
⦁Does a centralized or decentralized protocol govern the digital asset?
⦁
⦁Who are the potential regulators?
⦁
⦁Who receives the tokens? That is, who are the investors?
The Issuer
Entrepreneurs may create a project involving some element of crypto. Who are 
the entrepreneurs and innovators? Who is the business team? People often invest 
in a project based on the reputations of those behind it. High-quality people and 
business partners provide comfort to investors, regulators, and customers. Teams 
with business experience may be better suited to run a business than a group of 
wunderkinds who can solve technical problems but not adequately manage peo­
ple or finances. A 20-year-old virtuoso with a vision and the ability to execute that 
vision may be better suited when paired with a 50-year-old chief executive officer 
with decades of experience.
Another issue involves the legal entity formed for this new business. Deciding 
on the type of entity requires tax planning and choosing where to incorporate it. 
States typically allow someone to establish a limited liability company (LLC) for 
less than $200. LLCs are attractive because they provide tax flexibility, economic 
flexibility, and the legal liability protection of a corporation but with fewer corpo­
rate formalities. Although many choose LLCs, some should weigh other business 
forms’ benefits and considerations, such as limited partnerships and corporations.
Tax structuring is also incredibly important at this stage. Taxes affect the type 
of entity, as corporations have double taxation. A domestic corporation pays a 
corporate-level tax on its taxable income. Its shareholders pay tax on dividends 
paid by the corporation. Besides federal taxation, corporations also pay income 
and franchise taxes to states and certain cities where the corporation is incorpo­
rated and does business. Finally, taxes affect the decision to incorporate offshore 
or stay in the United States.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 3 ---

Tokenized and Non-tokenized Assets     251
Deciding where to form entities is another critical decision. State laws differ. 
Some states are more business- or crypto-friendly than others. Suppose someone 
creates an entity outside the state where that person lives or maintains an office. 
In that case, the person should hire a company to function as a registered agent in 
the state of incorporation. This additional expense can be at least several hundred 
dollars. When forming new companies, many lawyers reflexively incorporate in 
Delaware.
However, a prudent approach is to look first to the state where the compa­
ny’s principals are located to avoid registered agent expenses or incorporate in 
Wyoming, a crypto-friendly state. Delaware and Nevada are popular states for 
incorporation because they do not impose a state-level tax on out-of-state activi­
ties, offer a well-developed body of corporate law, and may offer some degree 
of anonymity to shareholders. However, other states may provide a legal advan­
tage unavailable elsewhere. For instance, Wyoming has engaged in several crypto-
friendly laws. South Dakota is a popular jurisdiction to form trust companies for 
financial institutions’ crypto custody. Regardless of where incorporation occurs, 
a company should generally qualify to do business in each state where it conducts 
business activities.
Investors
This section discusses two investor categories: early investors and token investors. 
A detailed discussion of venture capital (VC) investments into start-ups is beyond 
this section’s scope. VC deals involve a high level of negotiation. Often the non-
economic terms are as crucial to a start-up’s success as is capital infusion. Non-
monetary benefits include bringing in board members, creating synergies with 
other companies in which a VC firm invests, and providing mentorship, oversight, 
and management.
Early Investors.  Start-ups need money to incorporate, pay outside advisors 
(e.g., legal, tax, accounting, and audit fees), acquire resources, and pay for out­
sourced items (e.g., developers and marketers). These costs can quickly get into 
hundreds of thousands of dollars and are necessary to get to an actual early 
round of funding from seed investors.
When the founders exhaust their capital, they look to friends and family. 
Investors at this stage invest in stock and usually other securities, such as war­
rants, preferred stock, or forward contracts. When an entity issues a digital asset, 
these early investors typically get a significant amount upon issuance. However, 
these are generally small investments, in the thousands or tens of thousands of 
dollars. But if a start-up attracts considerable attention, these early investments 
could be worth millions or billions.
These offerings should be exempt from registration under the Securities Act of 
1933 under Rule 504 or Rule 506 of Regulation D. Under either type of exempt 
offering, 35 or fewer non-accredited investors can raise capital. Unlike Rule 504 
offerings, offerings under Rule 506 allow for general solicitation and no limit to 
the funds obtained from accredited investors. However, Rule 506 offerings require 
additional disclosure. Therefore, raising funds from friends and family under Rule 
504 may be more accessible, despite certain limitations.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 4 ---

252     Brett Cotler
A start-up may need to raise additional capital at a certain point. After the 
friends and family round, a company may attempt to raise a series A round of 
funding, a private offering to accredited investors, including angel investors and 
VC firms. These investors may also seek to be high in the capital stack, with com­
mon and preferred stock, and have access to the digital assets once the funding 
round launches. This round of funding is typically a private offering, exempt from 
registration under Rule 506 of Regulation D.
Token Investors.  Determining who the token investors are can be a function 
of the digital asset and its tokenomics, which is the study of the economics of 
crypto tokens or cryptocurrencies. One potential investor category in a digital 
asset is a future customer, who may view the investment as buying a future prod­
uct or service at a discount. Another investor category is a true investor, who sees 
value in a digital asset or promise in the start-up. A third investor category is a 
speculator. A speculator may invest in a token when it trades at pennies, hoping it 
catches on in the pages of Reddit or another online community and takes off “to 
the moon” in the parlance of such fora.
How or where a token trades may affect who invests. If an investor needs to con­
vert dollars to ether (ETH) to Binance coin (BNB) and then BNB into an obscure 
digital asset, the investor may only be a crypto enthusiast and not an average inves­
tor. A final investor category is the average retail investor, who wants economic 
exposure without maintaining wallets and private keys. This investor may invest in 
an exchange-traded fund or a private fund that trades crypto. A retail investor may 
also own bitcoin through a traditional brokerage or Coinbase account.
Regulators
Regulators depend on where the company is formed and does business, the token 
issuer’s business type, whether the digital asset is a security, and how the digital 
asset is issued. For instance, crypto companies in New York may need to apply 
for a BitLicense. New York’s BitLicense applies to different crypto organiza­
tions, including those transmitting crypto, buying and selling cryptocurrency as 
a customer business, providing exchange services to customers, and issuing cryp­
tocurrency. Crypto exchanges must also register and make filings with the Secu­
rities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Financial Industry Regulatory 
Authority (FINRA). Money transmitters must deal with each state having money 
transmission rules where they have customers. Selling tokens in a private offering 
(e.g., Reg D to accredited investors) or public offering (e.g., Reg A) requires the 
issuer to make certain filings to the SEC or state securities regulators (e.g., SEC 
Form D).
An essential item to consider is federal preemption. A start-up often must deal 
with a federal regulator, such as the SEC, instead of state regulators. However, 
suppose a start-up does not involve a federal regulator. In that case, that entity 
may have to deal with up to 50 state regulators and attorney generals. Although 
a start-up may not want to contend with the SEC, doing so may be strategic 
because it does not have to make individual filings in multiple states and comply 
with up to 50 state laws.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 5 ---

Tokenized and Non-tokenized Assets     253
Service Providers
Crypto start-ups rely on outside advisers and service providers. For example, 
law firms incorporate businesses, draft operating agreements, employment agree­
ments, investor documents, represent clients before regulators, prepare applica­
tions for business licenses and regulatory approvals, and structure businesses for 
tax efficiency. Accounting firms prepare tax returns, maintain financial books, 
prepare financial statements, and can help a start-up manage its business. Third-
party services providers may include:
⦁
⦁external consultants to lobby the government;
⦁
⦁outside developers for coding;
⦁
⦁financial institutions to serve as custodians of digital assets or assist with 
“know your customer” (KYC) and anti-money laundering (AML) compliance;
⦁
⦁cybersecurity specialists;
⦁
⦁marketing; and
⦁
⦁investment bankers and other placement agents to help sell the digital asset.
A start-up must pay these service providers and establish a relationship gov­
erned under an appropriate contract. Here are a few guidelines between these two 
parties. First, a start-up company should usually own any work product devel­
oped by outside contractors. Third-party developers should not retain ownership 
of any code they wrote for hire.
Second, a start-up may be held liable for the actions of its service providers. If 
a social media influencer says, “Your investment will increase 10-fold,” the SEC 
will have accessible evidence in its action against the start-up.
Finally, if a start-up pays a service provider in tokens, both the employer and 
service face tax, regulatory, and business issues. A discussion of these tax issues 
follows. From a business perspective, some service providers, such as law and 
accounting firms, want to receive fiat currency or highly liquid crypto for their 
services. Furthermore, in certain circumstances, insiders may be restricted in how 
they trade their employer’s securities.
Tokenomics
As previously noted, tokenomics refers to the economics of a digital asset. At 
its most basic level, tokenomics means the business deal between the issuer and 
token holders. From a business perspective, the token offering must be worth­
while for investors. From a legal perspective, a clear understanding of the busi­
ness terms of a digital asset sale may reduce legal costs. Therefore, tokenomics is 
important for crypto businesses when selling digital assets.
Without understanding tokenomics, lawyers may inadequately describe the 
digital asset in an offering prospectus, and ambiguities in offering documents 
may lead to investor confusion. Investors that feel wronged may sue the issuer 
or report the issuer to a regulator. Viewing a situation from an investor’s view­
point could help prevent future litigation. Crypto businesses and their lawyers 
that think about tokenomics should consider the following:


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 6 ---

254     Brett Cotler
⦁
⦁What are the digital asset issuer’s obligations and entitlements to the purchaser?
⦁
⦁Does a built-in economic benefit exist to owning the digital asset (i.e., the holder 
can redeem it for something of value), or is the potential return based only on 
the premise that the digital asset will appreciate given its speculative nature?
⦁
⦁Is the deal fair and balanced for all parties?
⦁
⦁Does the digital asset utility value? Can it redeem or use the tokens for goods 
or services with intrinsic value? How are the digital assets used or redeemed?
If an issuer can answer these questions, it may reduce the likelihood of a dis­
pute with investors. It may also reduce the time lawyers need to understand the 
digital asset, adequately describe it in offering materials, and lead to correspond­
ing savings in legal costs. As discussed in the next section, clearly defined toke­
nomics can also assist marketing efforts.
Marketing and Securities Law Considerations
A digital asset’s marketing could have significant legal ramifications. Although 
a digital asset may not be a security, it could be a security offering. The SEC is 
active in policing these matters.
Since 2013, the SEC has brought over 75 cases against defendants relating to 
digital assets and initial coin offerings (ICOs), with only 11 cases brought before 
2018 (Securities and Exchange Commission, 2021). In addition, at least 20 trad­
ing suspension cases involve digital assets.
The first case SEC v. Shavers et al. (2013), brought in 2013, alleged a Ponzi 
scheme involving bitcoin instead of dollars. Specifically, a federal judge ruled 
that the operator of Bitcoin Savings and Trust had operated a Ponzi scheme that 
defrauded investors. The judge awarded $40.7 million in damages following SEC 
charges of investment fraud. The crime alleged in the Shavers case was not a 
“crypto-crime.” Instead, crypto was the medium used to commit the crime.
Since this first case, the SEC has brought enforcement actions that involved:
⦁
⦁the unregistered offering of securities, including ICOs, security token offerings 
(STOs), and the like, and including crypto lending and decentralized finance 
(DeFi) investment programs;
⦁
⦁operating online venues for trading securities using digital assets without regis­
tering the websites as broker-dealers or stock exchanges and other unregistered 
broker-dealers;
⦁
⦁defrauding investors in ICOs and the like;
⦁
⦁obtaining cease and desist orders where a company was selling digital tokens in 
an unregistered offering to investors and other violations of various US federal 
securities laws;
⦁
⦁additional digital asset denominated Ponzi schemes and other general fraud 
denominated in cryptocurrency, and disgorgement actions for selling restricted 
stock in a blockchain technology company at market price and not the fixed 
price under a registration statement;
⦁
⦁false marketing of a crypto-focused investment fund;


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 7 ---

Tokenized and Non-tokenized Assets     255
⦁
⦁misleading promotion of an ICO without proper disclosure;
⦁
⦁obtaining a cease-and-desist where a CEO misrepresented the use of proceeds 
of securities offer to invest in blockchain companies and digital assets; and
⦁
⦁market manipulation, including charging an iced tea company with stock 
manipulation by falsely stating it was pivoting into crypto.
Besides actions against issuers, promotors, and other bad actors, the SEC also 
released valuable guidance to the industry in the form of an investigative report – 
the DAO report (Securities and Exchange Commission, 2017) – and public 
speeches at industry events – notably a speech by SEC Director William Hinman 
(2018). Although this guidance is non-binding, issuers should understand how the 
SEC views cryptocurrency and how issuers and legal counsel can analyze whether 
a digital asset is a security and whether the offering is a securities offering.
Whether a digital asset is a security for federal securities law purposes depends 
partly on whether it is an investment contract. Under the Howey Test (SEC v. 
Howey, 1946), a transaction is an investment contract if:
⦁
⦁there is an investment of money;
⦁
⦁there is an expectation of profits from the investment;
⦁
⦁the investment of money is in a common enterprise; and
⦁
⦁any profit comes from the efforts of a promoter or third party.
The latter two elements generated considerable discussion among securities law­
yers in the cryptocurrency context. Assume that bitcoin’s price is market-driven 
and bitcoin transactions are verified through mining. However, does that satisfy the 
element requiring profits coming from the efforts of others? Most attorneys say no.
In the DAO report, the SEC analyzed whether tokens issued by a decentral­
ized, autonomous organization might have been securities. For reference, a cor­
poration or other business entity traditionally issues stock and other securities. 
The DAO is a “virtual” organization embodied in computer code and executed 
on a blockchain. The DAO sold tokens, intending to use the token sale proceeds 
to fund various projects and profit from them, thereby giving value to the DAO 
tokens. In applying the Howey Test, the SEC concluded that investors gave money 
to a common enterprise (i.e., the DAO) with a reasonable expectation of profit 
derived predominantly from the managerial efforts of others.
The DAO’s facts are less important than the analysis applying the Howey Test 
to cryptocurrency. This analysis put the industry on notice of the SEC’s litigating 
position. The conversation developed and distinguished between investment or 
security tokens, which authorities generally regarded as securities for federal secu­
rities law purposes, and utility tokens. Unlike security tokens, usually intended 
to offer only investment value, utility tokens offer holders non-investment value. 
Utility tokens might be redeemed for goods or services or used on a platform 
for the services provided. Could that non-investment-related value be enough to 
cause a digital asset not to be classified as a security?
SEC Director Hinman offered his view on this subject in a public speech. 
Hinman’s view was that investors purchased digital assets with an expectation 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 8 ---

256     Brett Cotler
of profit derived from the efforts of others, regardless of any utility value of the 
digital asset. In Hinman’s opinion, ether was not a security, but it might have 
been a security at its issuance. Hinman pointed to “sufficient decentralization” 
to indicate that something could be a security and lose its character as such as it 
develops. A digital asset only used on the platform where created could be viewed 
differently, even if its initial offering was a security offering.
Finally, Hinman identified several non-exhaustive factors to consider when 
determining whether a digital asset is a security. What are the roles of the spon­
sors and promotors? Did the sponsors retain a financial interest in the digital 
asset and remain incentivized to increase the digital asset’s value? What are inves­
tors seeking when acquiring the digital asset? For example, are they seeking a 
return on their investment? Who controls the issuing entity? Does applying the 
Securities Act make sense?
Many in the industry latched onto Hinman’s remarks. However, they were just 
one senior SEC official’s view, not its official stance. If nothing else, Hinman’s 
speech provided valuable insights to help determine whether a digital asset offer­
ing might be a security offering.
Digital Asset Offerings Under Regulation A of the 
Securities Act
On July 10, 2019, the SEC granted qualification to Blockstack Token LLC’s sale 
of $28 million worth of digital tokens to the public under the SEC’s Regulation A 
registration exemption (Blockstack Token LLC, 2019). This offering was the first-
ever SEC-compliant public sale of securities tokens in the United States.
Congress amended Regulation A under the Securities Act of 1933 as part of 
the Jumpstart Our Business Startups Act of 2012. Many now call it “Regulation 
A+.” Regulation A allows companies to raise up to $50 million in 12 months 
without the burden of the full range of disclosure obligations that come with a 
traditional initial public offering.
Until this approval, companies wanting to sell tokens that are securities could 
not do so, except in private sales under Regulation D of the Securities Act or 
a different exemption from the registration requirement of the Securities Act. 
Although this approach permits token sellers to raise funds, many token plat­
forms are designed with tokenomics requiring freely tradeable tokens. Tokens 
sold according to Regulation D are not freely tradeable for the first year. By offer­
ing and selling tokens under Regulation A+, Blockstack can sell freely tradeable 
tokens to the public.
The day the SEC qualified Blockstack’s Regulation A offer, it also qualified 
another Regulation A offering, YouNow, Inc.’s offering of up to 178 million 
Props Tokens. These tokens can reward users for in-app activities, administra­
tion, blockchain development, and subsequent sale to the public (YouNow, Inc., 
2019). However, Regulation A offerings are limited to no more than $50 million 
annually (so-called “Tier 2” offerings). Any registrant wanting to register a larger 
amount of securities for sale must do so through a full-blown registration process. 
No one has successfully registered a token offering under that process.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 9 ---

Tokenized and Non-tokenized Assets     257
Structuring Crypto Businesses: Tax, Legal, and Regulatory 
Considerations
At this point, entrepreneurs can communicate to their lawyers about what the 
business does or will do, where it operates, its owners and investors, customers to 
be served, and other pertinent information. This information is key to determin­
ing: (1) an efficient tax structure; (2) what licenses or registrations or exemptions 
from registrations need to be filed; (3) what key documents are needed; and (4) 
what else lawyers and other advisers need to do to help establish the business.
Tax Structuring
All crypto businesses are just businesses, and general tax planning considerations 
apply to crypto and traditional companies almost equally. This section discusses 
cryptocurrency taxation, specific token offerings, and tax considerations for 
structuring crypto start-ups.
Crypto Taxation.  Image the following situation. A lawyer was on a conference 
call with a client who planned to launch a cryptocurrency-focused hedge fund. As 
the lawyer explained specific rules around in-kind contributions of bitcoin and 
ether, the client interjects, “But where in the tax code are cryptocurrencies men­
tioned? There are no rules right now!” The client learned that US federal income 
tax authorities and general tax principles apply to transactions in cryptocurrency.
The seminal piece of guidance is Internal Revenue Service (IRS) Notice 2014-
21. The IRS released this notice before the Ethereum network’s launch, but after 
the launch of Litecoin, Dogecoin, Ripple, and about a dozen others. In this 
notice, the IRS stated that cryptocurrencies readily convertible into fiat currency 
should be treated as property and not as currency. This ruling means that:
⦁
⦁special rules that apply to foreign currency transactions do not apply to crypto;
⦁
⦁if crypto is held as a capital asset, gains upon a sale would be capital gains;
⦁
⦁mining crypto by an individual was self-employment income;
⦁
⦁businesses that accept crypto as payment for goods or services must include 
crypto’s fair market value in income as they received cash, and such amount 
was the business’s tax basis in the crypto;
⦁
⦁employees and other service providers compensated in crypto must take the 
crypto into account for purposes of computing their income taxes and payroll 
or self-employment taxes; and
⦁
⦁general tax principles should be applied to crypto transactions without further 
guidance.
Although helpful, many unanswered questions remain. One issue involves 
valuation. Cryptos trade at different prices on different exchanges. Due to high 
volatility, an hour’s difference could mean significant tax savings or tax costs.
Second, tax uncertainties exist when trading cryptos for other cryptos. For 
instance, a lack of clarity exists about whether crypto-for-crypto trades are eli­
gible for tax deferral under section 1031 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 10 ---

258     Brett Cotler
as amended. This section allowed for tax-deferred sales of real estate and prop­
erty used in a trade or business. In 2017, section 1031 applied only to real estate. 
The IRS also came out in FAQs on its website that this section did not apply 
to crypto-for-crypto trades for tax years before 2018. This pronouncement was 
noteworthy at the time because few people reported their crypto gains. If the IRS 
had audited this issue, crypto traders might have had a large tax bill. Addition­
ally, tracking is a complicated issue because investors may buy cryptos at different 
times and price points, trade cryptos for other cryptos, and trade one crypto at 
different prices on various exchanges. Additionally, some cryptos do not have a 
readily determinable US dollar equivalent. Some taxpayers may be unaware of 
these tax issues and trade crypto without keeping these records.
Third, the crypto space was rapidly evolving, and the IRS was largely silent on 
new developments. Hedge funds began trading crypto, which meant more inves­
tors and questions, including:
⦁
⦁Would a non-US domiciled hedge fund’s crypto trading activities constitute a 
US trade or business for US federal income tax purposes?
⦁
⦁Could hedge funds or individual traders make a mark-to-market election on 
crypto?
⦁
⦁Firms tried to launch exchange-traded crypto funds to expand access to retail 
investors. Could these funds be structured as grantor trusts, publicly traded 
partnerships, or mutual funds?
⦁
⦁Investors could buy and trade bitcoin futures. Did wash sales and straddle rules 
apply to bitcoin specifically and crypto generally?
⦁
⦁New blockchain start-ups attempted to raise capital with token issuances in 
ICOs or STOs. What are the consequences to the issuing company?
Besides these questions, vast uncertainty prevailed as to how the tax authori­
ties would treat smart contacts, airdrops, hard forks, DeFi, the tokenization of 
assets, and centralized bank decentralized currencies for tax purposes. Tax attor­
neys and certified public accountants had to determine reasonable tax positions 
without additional guidance when dealing with these and other issues.
Further guidance occurred in 2019 in Revenue Ruling 2019-24. In this ruling, 
the IRS provided advice on the federal income tax treatment of cryptocurrency 
received in an airdrop or a hard fork. A person receives tokens in an airdrop, usu­
ally because of existing ownership of another token. A hard fork occurs when a 
cryptocurrency on a blockchain undergoes a protocol change resulting in a per­
manent diversion from the legacy blockchain. The legacy cryptocurrency’s owners 
receive units of the progeny cryptocurrency. The IRS stated that cryptocurrency 
received in an airdrop or a hard fork was a taxable event. Also, the value of the 
crypto received was ordinary income. A taxable event occurs when a taxpayer can 
sell the crypto received. Suppose a taxpayer’s wallet does not support the crypto 
received in the airdrop or hard fork. In that case, the taxable event might occur 
days or weeks later, when the crypto might have significantly appreciated.
Given the scarcity of official IRS guidance, tax advisers must apply general 
tax principles to crypto. The tax positions related to acquiring, holding, or selling 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 11 ---

Tokenized and Non-tokenized Assets     259
cryptocurrency depend on the transaction’s specific facts. Some cryptocurrencies 
look and act more like gift cards that some can use to purchase services or goods 
from the crypto’s issuer. Others look and act more like a transactional medium 
of exchange (currency). Still, other cryptos resemble financial products. How an 
issuer and taxpayer use crypto helps determine the tax consequences related to its 
ownership and sale.
⦁
⦁If a person buys cryptocurrency as an investment, the IRS taxes the gains from 
its sale as capital gains.
⦁
⦁If a person is a crypto dealer or otherwise uses it in a trade or business, gains 
from the sale of cryptocurrency are ordinary income.
⦁
⦁If someone uses crypto to pay for goods or services, the IRS taxes the person 
on the difference between that person’s basis in the crypto and the value of the 
goods or services received.
Token Offerings
From a US federal income tax perspective, the economic rights and obligations of 
issuers and holders of digital assets are paramount in determining the proper tax 
treatment. According to Code sections 721(a) and 1032, a company’s issuance of 
debt or equity does not generally recognize taxable income to the company. How­
ever, the sale of other property by a company does result in taxable income. Before 
2018, the US federal corporate income tax rate was 35 percent. Authorities lowered 
the corporate tax rate beginning in 2018 to 21 percent. Consequently, an improp­
erly structured ICO might have only been 65–79 percent effective after taxes.
Assuming the tokens were not characterized as debt or equity for US federal 
income tax purposes, the recognition of taxable income might not occur on day 
one. In early ICOs, issuers sold tokens before their creation and issuance under a 
“simple agreement for future tokens” (“SAFT”). For US federal income tax pur­
poses, US issuers of tokens under a SAFT usually would not recognize income until 
token delivery. In addition, if the tokens were like gift cards, in the sense that the 
tokens entitled the holder to some future benefit from the issuer, the holder could 
elect to recognize income for US tax purposes during the subsequent tax year.
As mentioned previously, the issuance of debt and equity does not result in 
taxable income to the issuer. However, Delaware allows issuing equity on a block­
chain. Tokenized equity issued by a Delaware corporation should typically be 
regarded as equity in a corporation for tax purposes. The analysis is unclear when 
a digital asset is not issued as tokenized equity or a tokenized debt instrument but 
may be treated as such.
Whether an instrument is a debt or equity for US federal income tax purposes 
depends on the facts and circumstances. A token can potentially be character­
ized as equity for US federal income tax purposes under certain circumstances: 
it is perpetual, has voting rights, has economic exposure to the issuer’s growth 
or negative growth, and offers a right to distribute ongoing profits. The issuer 
typically makes this determination, which is binding on the investors, whether by 
statute or by contract.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 12 ---

260     Brett Cotler
Alternatively, characterizing a token as indebtedness for US federal income 
tax purposes may be possible if it has a limited term, offers little upside (i.e., 
interest payments that are not contingent on profits) and downside protection 
(i.e., principal protection), provides for a lump-sum or series of distributions and 
contains other signs of debt. The unconditional obligation to pay interest and 
repay the principal by a fixed maturity date is a hallmark of debt instruments. The 
right of token holders to enforce payment of principal and interest in the event of 
default indicates that the token is more likely to be characterized as debt for tax 
purposes. Understanding all economic terms regarding a digital asset is vital in 
determining how to describe a digital asset for tax purposes.
Crypto Business Structuring Considerations
New businesses must consider legal and tax factors from day one. The failure to 
consider liability protection, governance and capitalization flexibility, and taxes 
could be costly later in a business’s life. Poor corporate structuring could result in 
costly litigation between founders or key employees, and inadequate tax planning 
could mean forgone tax savings.
Choice of Entity Considerations
A crypto start-up can be established as an LLC. LLCs offer incredibly flexible 
governance (member-management or an appointed manager). For example, they 
can allocate income and expenses similar to partnerships but limit their members’ 
liability similar to a corporation. LLCs are also flexible from a tax perspective. 
Multi-member LLCs are partnerships for income tax purposes. However, they 
can elect to be a C or an S corporation for federal income tax purposes. By con­
trast, domestic corporations have corporate formalities, can only be taxed as a C 
or an S corporation, and offer less flexibility to get the right economics to their 
shareholders. For this reason, an LLC is a popular choice for a start-up business.
A US-based business can be taxed as a pass-through entity, such as a partner­
ship or an S or C corporation, for tax purposes. Although a discussion of partner­
ship-S and corporation-C corporations is beyond this section’s scope, this section 
discusses one ownership benefit of qualified small business corporations (QSBCs).
Qualified Small Business Stock Considerations
If a company qualifies as a QSBC, each shareholder can exclude gain on the sale 
by meeting a five-year holding period. The amount of gain excluded from income 
is the greater of $10 million or 10 times the shareholder’s tax basis in the QSBS 
stock. The requirements for this tax benefit generally are:
⦁
⦁The company was formed in the United States and classified as a C corporation 
for tax purposes.
⦁
⦁The taxpayer disposing of the QSBC stock must have acquired the stock at its 
original issuance for money, property other than stock in the issuer, or services 
provided to the company.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 13 ---

Tokenized and Non-tokenized Assets     261
⦁
⦁The gross value of the company’s assets is less than $50 million before and 
immediately after the stock issuance.
⦁
⦁At least 80 percent of the company’s assets are used in the active conduct of 
one or more qualified trades or businesses, including research and development 
activities.
⦁
⦁Certain tax filings occur.
Structuring a business as a QSBC offers benefits to founders and investors. VC 
and private equity investors have realized most of the tax savings attributable to 
QSBS stock investment.
Equity-based or Token-based Compensation Considerations
Many start-up businesses want to attract and reward key employees by issuing 
tokens or equity. Issuing property for services is generally taxable. The issuing 
company must value the equity or tokens on their issuance date and determine 
and remit applicable withholding taxes, such as payroll taxes for employees. The 
service provider must take such value into account as income.
Suppose the issuance of tokens or equity is subject to a vesting schedule (i.e., if 
the vesting conditions are not satisfied, the tokens are forfeited). In that case, the 
taxable event occurs at the earliest of the following dates: (1) the date the service 
provider freely transfers the property to a third party, (2) the date the property 
is no longer subject to a substantial risk of forfeiture, or (3) the issue date if an 
election under Code section 83(b) occurs within 30 days of the property’s issu­
ance. The 83(b) election is usually advisable when the value at issuance is low but 
expected to appreciate by the time of vesting.
Regulatory Licenses and Registrations
Federal and state licensing and registration obligations may apply depending on 
what the business is doing and where the activities occur.
⦁
⦁Crypto exchanges may be required to register with the SEC as a broker-dealer 
or exchange. The business may also need to register with FINRA.
⦁
⦁A crypto-business that helps customers send money to people in other countries 
may be required to register as a money transmitter in the states where it operates.
NY BitLicense
New York enacted a requirement for certain crypto-businesses based or doing 
business in New York to apply for a virtual currency license, colloquially known 
as the BitLicense. The BitLicense applies to five types of incorporated companies 
or doing business in New York or with New York customers:
⦁
⦁receiving virtual currency for transmission or transmitting virtual currency;
⦁
⦁storing, holding, or maintaining custody or control of virtual currency on 
behalf of others;


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 14 ---

262     Brett Cotler
⦁
⦁buying and selling virtual currency as a customer business; performing 
exchange services as a customer business; or
⦁
⦁controlling, administering, or issuing a virtual currency.
These conditions apply to many New York businesses where digital assets are 
integral to their business plan. Besides requiring filing an application, the New 
York Department of Financial Services imposes specific capitalization require­
ments and annual reporting obligations on licensees.
Wyoming
Wyoming has passed 24 crypto-friendly laws, making it a crypto-friendly state. 
One law allows a crypto business to apply for a watered-down bank charter, 
allowing it to become a special-purpose depository institution (SPDI) to offer 
banking services for crypto. Other states require a crypto business to undergo 
an expensive and time-consuming traditional bank charter process. Banks are 
subject to a strict regulatory and compliance regime relative to other financial 
institutions. Complying with all such regulatory requirements for banks in most 
cases does not make sense for crypto. The Wyoming SPDI is an example of state 
drafting laws specific to crypto.
Promises Kept: Ongoing Obligations
A company may have an annual reporting obligation to investors and regulators. 
These reports aim to provide transparency to investors and other interested par­
ties. For instance, as part of the BitLicense requirements, licensees must report to 
the NY Department of Financial Services annually. Companies whose securities 
are registered under the Securities Act must report annually to the SEC. In addi­
tion, key investors typically ask to see audited financial statements each year. 
These reporting obligations require companies to collaborate with accountants, 
auditors, and attorneys.
Summary and Conclusions
US federal and state laws generally apply to cryptocurrency, even though they are 
not specific to cryptocurrency. This situation may create uncertainty and doubt 
about how a transaction fits within a particular legal or regulatory framework. 
However, it does not mean that cryptocurrency transactions are somehow outside 
the reach of existing US federal and state laws.
Notwithstanding the applicability of current law and regulation to cryptocur­
rency transactions, federal regulatory agencies, such as the SEC, CFTC, and the 
IRS, have already begun issuing guidance and writing rules specifically aimed at 
the cryptocurrency space. In addition, some states, such as Wyoming, Delaware, 
and New York, have enacted crypto-specific laws and regulatory regimes gov­
erning how a cryptocurrency business can operate. However, the legal aspects 
involving digital assets are still in their infancy. Federal and state legislative and 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 15 ---

Tokenized and Non-tokenized Assets     263
regulatory bodies will continue to monitor the cryptocurrency space and ideally 
write thoughtful rules to help the industry grow and build public confidence.
Discussion Questions
1.	
Discuss how general securities laws might apply to a blockchain-based pro­
ject or start-up company.
2.	
Discuss the treatment of digital assets for federal legal purposes.
3.	
Explain the factors founders and investors should consider when raising 
capital.
4.	
Explain whether profits on crypto investments are subject to taxation.
5.	
Describe the tax implications of paying for goods and services, including 
employees, in crypto.
References
Blockstack Token LLC. (2019). Prospectus. Retrieved from https://www.sec.gov/Archives/
edgar/data/1725129/000162827919000230/younow1a.htm
Hinman, W. (2018, June 14). Digital asset transactions: When Howey met Gary (plastic). 
Securities and Exchange Commission. Retrieved from https://www.sec.gov/news/
speech/speech-hinman-061418
SEC v. Howey. (1946). 328 U.S. 293, 294. Retrieved from https://supreme.justia.com/cases/
federal/us/328/293/
SEC v. Shavers et al. (2013). U.S. Dist. LEXIS 130781 (E.D. Tex., Sept. 18, 2014). 
Retrieved from chrome-extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglclefindmkaj/viewer.
html?pdfurl=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.thompsonhine.com%2Fuploads%2F1137%2
Fdoc%2FECLR_Volume_14_Issue_5_pg_22.pdf&clen=68362&chunk=true
Securities and Exchange Commission. (2017, July 25). SEC Release No. 81207, Report of 
investigation pursuant to Section 21(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934: The 
DAO. Retrieved from https://www.sec.gov/litigation/investreport/34-81207.pdf
Securities and Exchange Commission. (2021). Cyber enforcement actions. Retrieved from 
https://www.sec.gov/spotlight/cybersecurity-enforcement-actions
YouNow, Inc. (2019). Prospectus. Retrieved from https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/
data/1725129/000162827919000230/younow1a.htm


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
