--- Page 1 ---

 
1 
 
 
 
JUSTICE AND LEGAL CERTAINTY IN REGULATING CRYPTOCURRENCY 
IN MALAYSIA 
 
Muhamad Marwan1,* and Galang Prayogo2 
1 Universiti Utara Malaysia, Kedah, Malaysia 
2 Universitas Diponegoro, Semarang, Indonesia  
* Email: mmarwan.uumalaysia@gmail.com 
 
Abstract 
Cryptocurrencies have received important attention as alternative mediums of exchange that can 
complement or even replace traditional ones. For this reason, cryptocurrencies have become an 
attractive investment vehicle with a constantly growing market cap. Cryptocurrencies’ role and 
economic impact cannot be concluded further than just a disruptive technology to the conventional 
financial system. The unstable and highly speculative value fluctuations coupled with a relatively 
new technological system have resulted in a lack of research to predict the future cryptocurrency 
market development. The research method used in this legal research is the juridical-normative 
method. The juridical-normative method is intended to seek or find rules, principles, and legal 
doctrines, which are then applied to analyze a phenomenon that is a legal subject. The presence of 
cryptocurrency has its own impact on social life. These impacts stem from the main feature of 
cryptocurrencies, the blockchain. Blockchain offers a revolution in the paradigm of the financial 
system, which was initially centered on the existence of central authorities such as governments and 
banks to become user-centered or user-centered. In addition, the philosophical values applied in 
cryptocurrency and blockchain reflect ideas that are synonymous with the collegial collective spirit, 
such as decentralization, transparency, equality, and accountability. 
 
Keywords: cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, business law, economy, Malaysia 
 
Abstrak 
Mata uang kripto telah mendapat perhatian penting sebagai media pertukaran alternatif yang dapat 
melengkapi atau bahkan menggantikan yang tradisional. Karena alasan ini, Mata uang kripto telah 
menjadi sarana investasi yang menarik dengan kapitalisasi pasar yang terus berkembang. Untuk 
saat ini, peran dan dampak ekonomi dari Mata uang kripto tidak dapat disimpulkan lebih jauh dari 
sekadar teknologi yang mengganggu sistem keuangan konvensional. Fluktuasi nilai yang tidak 
stabil dan sangat spekulatif ditambah dengan sistem teknologi yang relatif baru mengakibatkan 
kurangnya penelitian untuk memprediksi perkembangan pasar Mata uang kripto di masa depan. 
Metode penelitian yang digunakan dalam penelitian hukum ini adalah metode yuridis normatif. 
Metode yuridis-normatif dimaksudkan untuk mencari atau menemukan kaidah, asas dan doktrin 
hukum yang kemudian diterapkan untuk menganalisis suatu fenomena yang menjadi subjek hukum. 
Kehadiran cryptocurrency memiliki dampak tersendiri dalam kehidupan sosial. Dampak ini berasal 
dari fitur utama Mata uang kripto, blockchain. Blockchain menawarkan revolusi paradigma sistem 
keuangan yang awalnya berpusat pada keberadaan otoritas pusat seperti pemerintah dan bank 
menjadi user-centered atau berpusat pada pengguna. Selain itu, nilai-nilai filosofis yang diterapkan 
dalam cryptocurrency dan blockchain mencerminkan ide-ide yang identik dengan semangat kolektif 
kolegial seperti desentralisasi, transparansi, kesetaraan, dan akuntabilitas. 
 
Kata kunci: Mata uang kripto, Bitcoin, Hukum, Ekonomi, Malaysia 
 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 2 ---

Lex Publica, Vol. VI, No. 2, 2019, pp. 1-7 
 
2 
A. Introduction 
Cryptocurrency has recently become one 
of the most trending topics in economics and 
finance, including in Malaysia.1 Since the 
Dotcom crisis, commerce on the internet has 
increased tremendously, and the retail industry 
has revolutionized as internet sales exploded 
with more and more consumers shopping 
online.2 
Until 
the 
birth 
of 
the 
first 
cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, in 2009, online 
trading was mediated by financial institutions 
that functioned as trusted third parties to 
process electronic payments. While this system 
is good enough for most transactions, 
turnaround is very slow due to financial 
institution controls (privacy and trust issues) 
and costs.3 
Cryptocurrencies 
have 
received 
important attention as alternative mediums of 
exchange that can complement or even replace 
traditional ones and it challenges real currency 
such as Malaysian ringgit and Indonesian 
rupiah. For this reason, cryptocurrencies have 
become an attractive investment vehicle with a 
constantly growing market cap. Given its price 
volatility, the Bitcoin network has spawned a 
variety of start-ups and attracted a huge influx 
of venture capital.4  
The discovery of bitcoin appears not to 
seem without a clear basis for problems to be 
answered. Nakamoto identified two main 
problems indicating that the conventional 
banking system is no longer relevant. The first 
problem is the lack of trust between the 
transacting parties. The factors for lack of trust 
are very diverse in terms of physical (distance 
and location) and non-physical (attitude and 
behavior problems, lack of knowledge of the 
opponent’s background, and others). 
It 
indicates that trust is an abstract thing whose 
 
1 Durgha Moorthy. "A study on rising effects of 
cryptocurrency in the regulations of Malaysian legal 
system." International Journal of Business, Economics 
and Law 15, no. 4 (2018): 35-41. 
2 Yhlas Sovbetov.  “Factors Influencing Cryptocurrency 
Prices: Evidence fom Bitcoin, Ethereum, Dash, Litcoin, 
and Monero.” Journal of Economics and Financial 
Analysis 2, no. 2 (2018); Jaysing Bhosale, and Sushil 
Mavale. "Volatility of select crypto-currencies: A 
comparison of Bitcoin, Ethereum and Litecoin." Annu. 
Res. J. SCMS, Pune 6 (2018); Angelo Corelli. 
utility is very limited, and its fulfillment is 
difficult to achieve.   
The second problem is the absolute 
interventions 
of 
intermediary 
financial 
institutions, which are too strong and tend to be 
authoritarian 
in 
interfering 
in 
private 
transactions. Financial intermediaries are 
always present at every moment of a money 
transfer, often without considering the freedom 
of the transacting parties to choose aliases by 
force. Examples of this form of financial 
intermediary are banks, credit institutions, and 
other institutions responsible for regulating and 
providing oversight in every economic 
activity. Nakamoto argues that the presence of 
financial intermediaries is often detrimental to 
society because it consumes unwanted, and 
often excessive, time and costs that the 
transacting parties inevitably bear.5 
Seeing 
the 
limitations 
of 
the 
conventional financial system through banking 
intermediaries, Nakamoto argues that the era of 
the intermediary financial system is outdated 
and must be replaced. Nakamoto offers a 
solution by building networks where trust is no 
longer used. This network is a blockchain, 
which is a financial system that resembles a 
“ledger-based system” where all transactions 
are carried out without intermediaries (peer-to-
peer) and are directly recorded in this “ledger.” 
Instead of financial intermediaries to ensure 
transaction security, every recorded transaction 
will be documented through a series of 
complex digital codes, which are guaranteed to 
be fast and without errors or misuse. From this 
network, the units of value transactions are 
called Bitcoins. Through blockchain and 
Bitcoin, Nakamoto has created an alternative 
financial technology that is successful in 
solving deadlock problems caused by fraud-
"Cryptocurrencies and exchange rates: A relationship 
and causality analysis." Risks 6, no. 4 (2018): 111. 
3 Dimaz Ankaa Wijaya. Mengenal Bitcoin dan 
Cryptocurrency. Puspantara, 2016. 
4 Posma Sariguna Johnson Kennedy, and Alvani 
Amaerita 
Harefa. 
"The 
Financial 
Technology, 
Regulation 
and 
Banking 
Adaptation 
In 
Indonesia." Fundamental Management Journal 3, no. 1 
(2018): 1-11. 
5 Dimaz Ankaa Wijaya. Op Cit., 


--- Tables Found ---
	Durgha Moorthy. "A study on rising effects of
cryptocurrency in the regulations of Malaysian legal	
system." International Journal of Business, Economics	
and Law 15, no. 4 (2018): 35-41.	

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 3 ---

Justice and Legal Certainty in Regulating 
Cryptocurrency in Malaysia 
Mohammad Marwan 
 
3 
prone financial intermediary systems and can 
also directly bridge producers and consumers.6 
The discovery of Bitcoin has stimulated 
the development of financial technology to 
move forward. The success of bitcoin has led 
to the emergence of competing cryptocurrency 
brands in the market; these products are called 
“altcoins.” Examples of altcoins include 
Ethereum, Litecoin, Namecoin, Peercoin, 
EOS, and Cardano. As of early 2019, 
thousands of cryptocurrency brands are 
circulating in the digital market with an 
aggregate value of more than 120 billion US 
dollars. 
The 
Bitcoin 
network 
promises 
substantial efficiency gains (e.g., low costs) 
compared to paper money-based digital 
payment systems. Furthermore, due to its open 
and agnostic nature, the Bitcoin protocol 
embodies the ability to support independent 
innovation. For example, Bitcoin development 
is free to introduce innovative applications to 
augment the Bitcoin network without third-
party intervention. In this sense, Bitcoin and 
the underlying blockchain technology are 
capable of overcoming market-disrupting 
capabilities.7 
Cryptocurrency is a new breakthrough in 
the development of the financial world in the 
era of modern technology. Although the 
development 
of 
cryptocurrencies 
is 
a 
disruptive innovation to the conventional 
financial system, it does not mean that 
cryptocurrencies have surpassed or replaced 
“money” itself. Virtual currency is a type of 
digital payment medium whose economic 
value does not depend on the general banking 
system as the central financial authority. On 
the other hand, virtual currency’s economic 
value and transaction procedures can only be 
determined, used, and accepted by the 
 
6 Nathaniel Popper. Decoding the enigma of Satoshi 
Nakamoto and the birth of Bitcoin. New York Times, 
2015. 
7 Clayton M. Christensen, and Joseph L. Bower. 
"Customer power, strategic investment, and the failure 
of leading firms." Strategic management journal 17, no. 
3 (1996): 197-218; Manish K. Srivastava, and Devi R. 
Gnyawali. "When do relational resources matter? 
Leveraging portfolio technological resources for 
breakthrough innovation." Academy of Management 
Journal 54, no. 4 (2011): 797-810. 
developer or by consensus (agreement) from 
the members of the virtual community who use 
it. Virtual currency is a decentralized currency 
that does not involve a third party (trustee) to 
secure transactions but rather propagates 
through peer-to-peer transactions. Due to their 
pure and equal collective function, virtual 
currency has a high use value but only for those 
who recognize and use it. It does not mean that 
the virtual currency market cannot develop. 
Along with the internet world that is always 
evolving with fluid boundaries, the population 
of virtual currency users is also increasing, and 
the value of the currency will be higher. 
Bitcoin is one of the most common examples 
of virtual currency.8 
 
B. Research Method 
The research method used in this legal 
research is the juridical-normative method. 
The juridical-normative method is intended to 
seek or find rules, principles and legal 
doctrines which are then applied to analyze a 
phenomenon that is a legal subject. The result 
of normative legal research is the novelty of a 
theory, argument, or legal concept as a solution 
to solving a legal problem. A problem is 
examined or studied from legal sources, 
namely statutory regulations, jurisprudence, as 
well as theoretical sources from legal experts. 
These consequences are in the ontological, 
epistemological, and axiological aspects. 
Epistemologically, normative legal research in 
this 
dissertation 
must 
be 
hermeneutic, 
argumentative, logical, and normative through 
the concept of economic analysis of law or 
economic analysis of law. Axiologically, the 
form of research results from this dissertation 
is prescriptive or in the form of proposals, 
references, or recommendations.9 
8 Arvind Narayanan, Joseph Bonneau, Edward Felten, 
Andrew Miller, and Steven Goldfeder. Bitcoin and 
cryptocurrency 
technologies: 
a 
comprehensive 
introduction. Princeton University Press, 2016.; Lewis, 
Antony. The basics of bitcoins and blockchains: an 
introduction to cryptocurrencies and the technology that 
powers them. Mango Media Inc., 2018. 
9 Zainal Asikin. Pengantar metode penelitian hukum. 
Jakarta: Raja Grafindo, 2016; Soejono Soekanto. 
Metode penelitian hukum. Jakarta: Rineka Cipta, 2003. 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 4 ---

Lex Publica, Vol. VI, No. 2, 2019, pp. 1-7 
4 
 
C. Result and Discussion 
Economics provides scientific theories to 
predict the effects of legal sanctions on 
behavior. To economists, sanctions look like 
prices, and perhaps people are law-abiding 
because they see how much they pay. People 
respond to higher prices by consuming less of 
the more expensive item, perhaps, people also 
respond to tougher legal sanctions by doing 
less of the sanctioned activity.10 
Economics has appropriate mathematical 
theories (price theory and game theory) and 
empirical 
methods 
(statistics 
and 
econometrics) to analyze the impact of implicit 
prices attached to behavior. For example, 
suppose the producer knows that sometimes 
his product will hurt the consumer. A question 
can be raised, namely how safe will he make 
the product. For companies seeking to 
maximize profits, the answer depends on three 
costs:11 
1) The cost of making a safer product, 
depending on the design and manufacture; 
2) Manufacturer’s 
legal 
liability 
for 
consumer injury; and 
3) The extent to which the injury discourages 
consumers from buying their product. 
 
Profit-maximizing firms will adjust 
security levels until the additional safety costs 
match or equal the benefits minus the 
responsibilities and changes in consumer 
demand 
for 
their 
products. 
Economics 
generally provides behavioral theories to 
predict how people respond to laws. This 
theory goes beyond intuition, just as science 
goes 
beyond 
common 
sense. 
People’s 
feedback is always relevant for making, 
revising, canceling, and interpreting laws. A 
famous essay in law and economics describes 
the law as a cathedral—a large, ancient, 
intricate, 
beautiful, 
mysterious, 
sacred 
 
10 Arvind Narayanan, Op Cit.,; Asli Ozpolat, Gulsum 
Gunbala Guven, Ferda Nakipoglu Ozsoy, and Ayse 
Bahar. "Does rule of law affect economic growth 
positively." Research in World Economy 7, no. 1 
(2016): 107. 
11Loc. Cit. 
building. Knowledge of the theory of behavior 
resembles a mortar between cathedral stones, 
which supports the whole structure.12 
Approaches based on economic behavior 
will help the law with its three functions, 
namely, positive, prescriptive and normative.13 
The Positive task, which is primarily for the 
economic analysis of law and is an emphasis 
here, is to explain the effects and content of 
law. How the law will affect human behavior, 
what are the possible responses of individuals 
to changes in the rules, and why the law has 
changed in such a way. A deep understanding 
of human behavior will increase the credibility 
of answers to such questions. Second, the 
prescriptive task is to see how the law can be 
used to achieve the specified goals, such as 
preventing unwanted behavior in society. 
Third, the normative task is to assess more 
broadly the end of the legal system. In 
conventional economic analysis, normative 
analysis is no different from prescriptive 
analysis, because the goal of the legal system 
is to maximize social welfare. But from a 
behavioral economic perspective, the end of 
the legal system is more complex because 
everyone has different preferences. The 
priority is to see the patterns that occur in 
society. 
The concept of man as the rational 
maximizer of his interests implies that people 
respond to gain- if a person’s environment 
changes in such a way that he can increase his 
satisfaction by changing his behavior, then he 
will. From this proposition, three basic 
principles of economics are derived:14 
1) The first is the inverse relationship 
between the price charged and the quantity 
demanded. If the price of steak goes up 10 
cents, and the price of the other item 
doesn’t go up, then the steak is more 
expensive than the other item, or at least 
more expensive than it was before. If a 
person is rational, then he will react by 
12 Guido Calabresi and A. Douglas Melamed. Property 
Rules, Liability Rules, and Inalienability: One View of 
the Cathedral. Harvard Law Review, 85, 1972. 
13 Christine Jolls, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler. 
"A 
behavioral 
approach 
to 
law 
and 
economics." Stanford Law Review. 50 (1997): 1471. 
14 Richard Posner. Economic Analysis of Law. New 
York: Wolters Kluwer Law & Business, 1986. 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 5 ---

Justice and Legal Certainty in Regulating 
Cryptocurrency in Malaysia 
Mohammad Marwan 
 
5 
looking for a substitute even though the 
item is less to his liking than steak. The 
items he used to dislike were now more 
attractive because they were cheaper than 
steaks. Some other consumers will 
continue to buy steak even though the 
price has increased, because the substitute 
is not worth the steak. Among consumers 
who continue to buy steak, there are 
consumers who reduce the amount of their 
purchases. 
2) Consumers—in the example above—try 
to maximize their utility (happiness, 
pleasure and satisfaction). 
3) The third principle is that resources tend to 
gravitate toward their most valuable use if 
voluntary exchange (barter) is permitted. 
For example, Farmer A offers to buy Farm 
B at a price higher than its market value. It 
can be interpreted that Farm B has more 
value for A than for B. By owning Farm B, 
Farmer A can produce output that is more 
valuable measured by the price that 
consumers are willing to pay. 
 
The economic theory of law is the most 
promising theory of extant legal theory. 
Anthropologists, sociologists, psychologists, 
political scientists, and other social scientists 
also make analyzes of the legal system, but 
their work so far is not rich enough in 
theoretical or empirical content to compete 
seriously with the work of economists.15 Using 
an economic approach to legal analysis, two 
basic questions about law are addressed. The 
first is descriptive in nature, namely about the 
effects of the rule of law, the second is 
normative, which is related to social desires for 
the rule of law.16 The economic analysis of 
law, which was pioneered by Richard Posner, 
has two main bases, namely the theory of 
property rights and transaction costs.17 This 
analysis is an interesting as well as challenging 
attempt to use the concepts and methods of 
modern economic reasoning to gain a deeper 
understanding of legal issues.18 
 
15Ibid., 
16 Steven Shavell. Foundation od Economic Analysis of 
Law. Massachautes: Harvard University Press, 2004. 
The existence of cryptocurrencies in the 
global financial world creates a disruptive 
wave of conventional financial systems. On the 
one hand, cryptocurrencies get rid of the role 
of third-party authorities to regulate an 
economic process and transactions. But on the 
other hand, there is a financial element that is 
most significantly affected by the disruptive 
impact of cryptocurrencies, namely money or 
means of payment (legal tender). In the 
conventional financial system, the form of 
payment 
instrument 
that 
is 
universally 
recognized is fiat currency, where the 
determination of production, circulation, and 
speculation is regulated and determined by 
government authorities, a common example is 
paper money. Cryptocurrencies raise new 
issues for debate in terms of legal tender. 
Fundamentally, cryptocurrencies are different 
from 
fiat 
money. 
Cryptocurrencies 
are 
produced like gold – by being mined – but 
treated and spread on the market like money. 
Due to their limited supply, the value of 
cryptocurrencies can increase as they become 
scarce. The nature of this cryptocurrency is 
different from fiat money which can be 
produced indefinitely but is at risk of inflation 
and loses significant economic value. In 
addition, 
cryptocurrencies 
can 
only 
be 
accessed and used digitally, where the facility 
to access the internet network is not evenly 
distributed to everyone. Unfortunately, there is 
no solution that can bridge this problem, with 
the example of converting it into physical 
money, without risking the anonymity and 
independence 
of 
cryptocurrencies 
from 
financial authorities.  
For now, cryptocurrencies’ role and 
economic impact cannot be concluded further 
than just a disruptive technology to the 
conventional financial system. The unstable 
and highly speculative value fluctuations 
coupled with a relatively new technological 
system have resulted in a lack of research to 
predict the future cryptocurrency market 
development. Some economists speculate that 
the duality of cryptocurrencies as a limited 
17 Klaus Mathis. Efficiency Instead of Justice? Searching 
for the Philosophical Foundations of the Economic 
Analysis of Law. Lucerne; Springer, 2008. 
18Ibid.,  


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 6 ---

Lex Publica, Vol. VI, No. 2, 2019, pp. 1-7 
6 
medium of exchange like gold but speculative 
like currency can be analyzed through a supply 
and demand theory approach. This theory sees 
the economic role of cryptocurrencies as more 
of a digital asset than a virtual currency. 
However, this view is at risk of causing 
investors’ expectations of cryptocurrencies to 
become more speculative due to the positive 
feedback mechanism where positive market 
expectations that reinforce each other can 
result in an increase in speculation in the price 
of an item to an unreasonable level. This has 
the risk of causing a price bubble which will 
lead to a drastic decrease in the total value of 
the item to the point that it is not even worth it 
at all. 
 
D. Conclusion 
The presence of cryptocurrency has its 
own impact on social life. These impacts stem 
from the main feature of cryptocurrencies, the 
blockchain. Blockchain offers a revolution in 
the paradigm of the financial system, which 
was initially centered on the existence of 
central authorities such as governments and 
banks to become user-centered or user-
centered. In addition, the philosophical values 
applied in cryptocurrency and blockchain 
reflect ideas that are synonymous with the 
collegial 
collective 
spirit, 
such 
as 
decentralization, transparency, equality, and 
accountability. Decentralization means the 
transfer of the center of power from a central 
authority to a collective authority, such as 
community consensus. Transparency means 
freedom to access all information needed in a 
social interaction or financial transaction. 
Equality is non-discriminatory treatment from 
the system and community to each entity to 
participate in 
economic activities. And 
accountability is the obligation of every 
community member to account for every 
action and decision taken and the resulting 
impact. However, the application of these 
values creates potentials that are like a double-
edged sword. 
On the one hand, the wise use of 
cryptocurrencies can advance the system of 
protecting human rights, such as freedom of 
expression and privacy, while enforcing social 
norms to be transparent and accountable in a 
community. 
But 
on 
the 
other 
hand, 
cryptocurrencies can be misused to hide traces 
of criminal activity or even as a tool of 
dictatorial rulers who want to undermine the 
freedom and rights of certain groups. 
Cryptocurrency relations in social life are not 
solely one-sided. The social system in a society 
can also affect the economic activity of 
cryptocurrencies. It is due to the speculative 
nature of the market on the economic value of 
cryptocurrencies. 
Thus, 
fluctuations 
in 
conflicts 
and 
social 
issues 
involving 
cryptocurrencies can affect cryptocurrency 
price speculation in the market, either directly 
or indirectly.
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
Antony, Lewis. The basics of bitcoins and blockchains: an introduction to cryptocurrencies and the 
technology that powers them. Mango Media Inc., 2018. 
Asikin, Zainal. Pengantar metode penelitian hukum. Jakarta: Raja Grafindo, 2016. 
Bhosale, Jaysing, and Sushil Mavale. “Volatility of select crypto-currencies: A comparison of 
Bitcoin, Ethereum and Litecoin.” Annu. Res. J. SCMS, Pune 6 (2018). 
Calabresi, Guido and A. Douglas Melamed. Property Rules, Liability Rules, and Inalienability: One 
View of the Cathedral. Harvard Law Review, 85, 1972. 
Christensen, Clayton M., and Joseph L. Bower. “Customer power, strategic investment, and the 
failure of leading firms.” Strategic management journal 17, no. 3 (1996): 197-218. 
Corelli, Angelo. “Cryptocurrencies and exchange rates: A relationship and causality 
analysis.” Risks 6, no. 4 (2018): 111. 
Jolls, Christine, Cass R. Sunstein, and Richard Thaler. “A behavioral approach to law and 
economics.” Stanford Law Review. 50 (1997): 1471. 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 7 ---

Justice and Legal Certainty in Regulating 
Cryptocurrency in Malaysia 
Mohammad Marwan 
 
7 
Kennedy, Posma Sariguna Johnson, and Alvani Amaerita Harefa. “The Financial Technology, 
Regulation and Banking Adaptation In Indonesia.” Fundamental Management Journal 3, no. 
1 (2018): 1-11. 
Mathis, Klaus. Efficiency Instead of Justice? Searching for the Philosophical Foundations of the 
Economic Analysis of Law. Lucerne; Springer, 2008. 
Moorthy, Durgha. “A study on rising effects of cryptocurrency in the regulations of Malaysian legal 
system.” International Journal of Business, Economics and Law 15, no. 4 (2018): 35-41. 
Narayanan, Arvind, Joseph Bonneau, Edward Felten, Andrew Miller, and Steven Goldfeder. Bitcoin 
and cryptocurrency technologies: a comprehensive introduction. Princeton University Press, 
2016. 
Ozpolat, Asli, Gulsum Gunbala Guven, Ferda Nakipoglu Ozsoy, and Ayse Bahar. “Does rule of law 
affect economic growth positively.” Research in World Economy 7, no. 1 (2016): 107. 
Popper, Nathaniel. Decoding the enigma of Satoshi Nakamoto and the birth of Bitcoin. New York 
Times, 2015. 
Posner, Richard. Economic Analysis of Law. New York: Wolters Kluwer Law & Business, 1986. 
Shavell, Steven. Foundation od Economic Analysis of Law. Massachautes: Harvard University 
Press, 2004. 
Soekanto, Soejono. Metode penelitian hukum. Jakarta: Rineka Cipta, 2003. 
Sovbetov, Yhlas. “Factors Influencing Cryptocurrency Prices: Evidence fom Bitcoin, Ethereum, 
Dash, Litcoin, and Monero.” Journal of Economics and Financial Analysis 2, no. 2 (2018). 
Srivastava, Manish K., and Devi R. Gnyawali. “When do relational resources matter? Leveraging 
portfolio technological resources for breakthrough innovation.” Academy of Management 
Journal 54, no. 4 (2011): 797-810. 
Wijaya, Dimaz Ankaa. Mengenal Bitcoin dan Cryptocurrency. Puspantara, 2016. 
 
 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
