--- Page 1 ---

Citation: Krishnan, L.P.; Vakilinia, I.;
Reddivari, S.; Ahuja, S. Scams and
Solutions in Cryptocurrencies—A
Survey Analyzing Existing Machine
Learning Models. Information 2023,
14, 171. https://doi.org/10.3390/
info14030171
Academic Editors: Georgios Siolas,
Georgios Alexandridis, Paraskevi
Tzouveli and Kun She
Received: 21 December 2022
Revised: 3 March 2023
Accepted: 4 March 2023
Published: 8 March 2023
Copyright:
© 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed
under
the
terms
and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
  
information
Article
Scams and Solutions in Cryptocurrencies—A Survey Analyzing
Existing Machine Learning Models
Lakshmi Priya Krishnan *, Iman Vakilinia
, Sandeep Reddivari
and Sanjay Ahuja
School of Computing, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA
* Correspondence: lakshmipriya.krishnan@unf.edu
Abstract: With the emergence of cryptocurrencies and Blockchain technology, the ﬁnancial sector
is turning its gaze toward this latest wave. The use of cryptocurrencies is becoming very common
for multiple services. Food chains, network service providers, tech companies, grocery stores, and
so many other services accept cryptocurrency as a mode of payment and give several incentives
for people who pay using them. Despite this tremendous success, cryptocurrencies have opened
the door to fraudulent activities such as Ponzi schemes, HYIPs (high-yield investment programs),
money laundering, and much more, which has led to the loss of several millions of dollars. Over
the decade, solutions using several machine learning algorithms have been proposed to detect these
felonious activities. The objective of this paper is to survey these models, the datasets used, and the
underlying technology. This study will identify highly efﬁcient models, evaluate their performances,
and compile the extracted features, which can serve as a benchmark for future research. Fraudulent
activities and their characteristics have been exposed in this survey. We have identiﬁed the gaps in
the existing models and propose improvement ideas that can detect scams early.
Keywords: cryptocurrencies; scams; blockchain; machine learning; fraud detection
1. Introduction
Over the past decade, Blockchain and cryptocurrencies have turned the outlook of
investments, transactions, and in fact the entire ﬁnancial sector. The very ﬁrst whitepaper
introducing a new currency and its network [1] was introduced in the market in November
2008 and the ﬁrst transaction using Bitcoin was done in January 2009. As of February 2022,
there are more than 10,300 cryptocurrencies that have come into being, which shows that
the technology has gained popularity in terms of every aspect such as new coins getting
introduced every few days, the number of transactions reaching millions, acceptance of
cryptocurrencies in exchange for services, etc. As proof for this claim, the value of 1BTC
has increased from $0 in 2009 to $20,144.44 as of 5 October 2022 [2]. Historical statistics
show that the Bitcoin value has peaked at $62,000 in October 2021. In a similar fashion,
the second-generation cryptocurrency Ethereum is growing extensively. Statistics reveal
that there are more than 250,000 conﬁrmed transactions of Bitcoin and more than 1,130,000
conﬁrmed transactions of Ethereum daily [3]. The top 20 cryptocurrencies make up close to
90% of the total market.
In the right hands, cryptocurrencies have grown in terms of their value and have
expanded their utility. Despite this success, some characteristics of cryptocurrencies attract
felonious activities, which has resulted in the loss of several millions of dollars and personal
identity. According to a report released by Federal Trade Commission [4], since the start of
2021 more than 46,000 people have lost over $1 billion in cryptocurrency scams. Alongside
the technologies growth, scam rates have also increased dramatically. This report also states
that the scam reports and losses have raised close to sixty times from 2018 to 2021. These
scams are categorized by experts into several types such as Ponzi schemes, pump and
dumps, money laundering, rug pulls, HYIPs (high-yield investment programs), hacking,
Information 2023, 14, 171. https://doi.org/10.3390/info14030171
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/information


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 2 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
2 of 20
phishing, and initial coin offering (ICO) scams. In recent times, crypto scams have been
reported to have started with an ad, post, or message on a social media platform. Investment
scams attract naïve investors with false promises of high returns.
Resources talk about how new ICOs are introduced frequently, and the success rates of
new startups which raise investment in the form of cryptocurrencies, are increasing [5]. The
need for detecting the scams and safeguarding wealth is highly important as cryptocurrency
is replacing ﬁat [6] in different services. Research works overtime have proposed detection
techniques using various models and a variety of approaches. In our survey, we propose
to study existing models, evaluate their efﬁciencies, and compile the set of features these
models have exploited to detect these scams.
Before going forward to look at these models, the need to understand the characteris-
tics of the public blockchain (this survey is focused on public blockchain technology) that
attract scammers is very crucial. While trying to understand this new wave of technology,
we have examined “decentralized”, “pseudonym”, “public records”, “digital money”, “se-
cured wallets”, “digital signatures”, “identity by addresses”, and many other terminologies.
This enriched glossary makes up the blockchain. The fact that blockchain technology is
decentralized and covers the identity of the user behind an address attracts scams and
felonious activities.
Machine learning models that use different algorithms have been used to detect scam
activities. Supervised, unsupervised, and many others such as ensemble learning and active
learning models are developed by different research works to produce accurate results in
identifying them. Most of the papers identify these scams as classiﬁcation problems and
try to classify the transactions into valid and scam related transactions, while few methods
try to classify them into more labels. Research to identify malicious websites, social media
posts, and fake portfolios have also attempted to provide a solution to these scams. The
contribution of this survey is to analyze these techniques, this research, and these data to
produce a performance analysis and a compilation for further research.
The rates at which the scammers cheat investors and lure money is increasing alarm-
ingly. Governments, ﬁnancial institutions, and investment advising agencies are trying
to bring solutions, but the knowledge and understanding of blockchain technology and
cryptocurrencies is inadequate among ofﬁcials and investors. This work also tries to expose
these efforts and provide an overview of how to secure these crypto-wallets.
In our research, we have considered different machine learning models that have
worked in detecting various types of scams. For our performance analysis, we have
categorized each work into a category of scams it is trying to catch. The papers we have
considered have used transactional, account, and smart contract features from a dataset of
cryptocurrency transactions and smart contracts. As mentioned, our research methodology
categorizes the models based on their scam type and focuses on the models’ performance
by analyzing their accuracy, F1 score, precision, and recall. We compare existing works that
use different machine learning models on different datasets for the primary reason that
each of these models is aimed at identifying scams in cryptocurrencies, and the success rate
of each depends on how accurate and efﬁcient they are at achieving it.
The rest of this survey is organized in the following way:
•
Section 2 explains the underlying technology of blockchain; provides background
information, mainly on different types of cryptocurrency scams; and lists examples
from the past.
•
Section 3 talks about related surveys and existing detection techniques , which were
referred to perform analysis.
•
Section 4 covers all of the analysis performed to compare models, the datasets used,
and the features extracted from detection models that aimed to address different types
of scams.
•
Section 5 lists the observations from the analysis of our survey and identiﬁes the best
performing models under various conditions.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 3 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
3 of 20
•
Section 6 concludes the survey with all of the understanding and the contributions
this survey produces for further research.
2. Background
Cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology are revolutionizing the global economy
in this digital era. The introduction of email changed the way the world communicates.
In the same way, digital currencies and wallets have dramatically changed the way the
world operates. Transactions, exchanges, and services now rely on and prefer digital
currencies over traditional money. One important reason behind this is the decentraliza-
tion and no third-party involvement that blockchain technology and digital currencies
offer [7]. Blockchain is a peer-to-peer network that acts as a public ledger for keeping logs of
transactions and any other activities. This technology serves as the neural network of cryp-
tocurrencies and is widely used for its three most valuable characteristics: decentralization,
immutability, and pseudonymity [8].
While the heart of this survey is to examine cryptocurrency scams and analyze the
solutions proposed to detect them, understanding the fundamental concepts and the
workings of blockchain and cryptocurrencies is very critical. One primary advantage that
scammers have when defrauding users is users’ lack of knowledge of how the system
works. Blockchain technology is a novel record system to store information that cannot be
tampered with as once a record is created it is copied across all the nodes in a network with
an immutable digital signature of users. Transactions in a blockchain happen in a sequence
that reﬂects the model and layers of a network. The process of transaction happens in the
following sequence [9]:
•
Signing: When a user sends money (cryptocurrency) from his wallet, a message is
created with the sender’s address, the receiver’s address, and the amount of money.
The wallet adds a digital signature that is unique and depends upon the public and
private keys of the user. A block is created after the reception and collection of
multiple messages.
•
Broadcasting: This block is then broadcast to every node for validation.
•
Conﬁrmation: The nodes validate the transaction; the block is added to the chain and
the entire network is updated with the status.
The concept of proof of work [6] comes into play in the conﬁrmation stage, where
nodes are rewarded for validating the transaction.
The ﬁrst cryptocurrency, Bitcoin, has proved to be a very successful application of
blockchain technology. Several new coins have been created for multiple purposes and
are being used by a diversity of services. According to a report by coindesk.com [10],
the blockchain market size for retail is expected to reach $4.6 billion by 2028. Not only
are big corporations moving toward digital decentralized currency but several startups
and medium-sized businesses are also attracted to this. Apart from Bitcoin, there are
other cryptocurrencies such as Ethereum, Tether, and U.S. Dollar Coin (USDC) whose
values are dramatically increasing. According to a report by Forbes, there are more than
20,000 cryptocurrency projects with values $952 billion. As of 30 September 2022, the market
capitalization of Bitcoin and Ethereum is $377 billion and $165 billion, respectively [11].
With the increasing use of digital and crypto wallets, it is very crucial to understand
the differences between traditional currencies and crypto coins. There are ﬁve notable
differences [12], which will provide a better understanding of the use of cryptocurrencies.
•
Firstly, Bitcoins or any cryptocurrencies are not controlled by a central authority such
as governments or banks.
•
The original identity of any cryptocurrency user can be hidden behind addresses,
whereas the users are always accountable in traditional currencies.
•
There is a limited number of coins, which are generally declared by the creator, instead
of in traditional cash where the central authority can decide to produce more and more.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 4 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
4 of 20
•
Cryptocurrency is open-source, by which the source code of the coin or the logic is
available publicly, which is not available in most traditional systems.
•
Finally, cryptocurrency itself has no value, and its value decreases or increases based
on usage. However, the value of a traditional currency is always endorsed by ﬁat.
It is evident from these differences that cryptocurrencies will continue to gain popular-
ity and be used for multiple services. Knowing the ins and outs of this technology is crucial
as it is gaining popularity. Let us look at some key concepts that will help researchers,
investors, and developers who look forward to engaging with this technology. These
concepts will also aid in understanding scams better because scammers exploit the lack of
information on them.
•
Smart contract: The introduction of smart contracts in Ethereum is one major reason
for the increase in new projects and investment opportunities using cryptocurrencies.
A smart contract is a program that consists of an agreement between two or more
parties on a blockchain, which is immutable. These smart contracts do not require
a third-party middleman, which reduces additional expenses. They work like an
intelligent agent and even automate the process of transferring money to accounts
based on pre-deﬁned conditions. These contracts generally have two attributes—value
and state—and they mostly use if–then statements as triggering conditions [13]. These
contracts are deployed to blockchain renders transactions traceable, transparent, and ir-
reversible.
•
Initial Coin Offering (ICO): The ICO provides a way for companies to raise money to
launch a new coin, app, or service. Interested investors can purchase a cryptocurrency
token issued by a company through an initial coin offering. Depending on the product
or service the company is offering, the token may have some utility or represent a
stake in the ﬁrm. Initial coin offerings are a popular way to raise funds for products
and services usually related to cryptocurrency [14].
•
Whitepaper: While introducing a new coin or project, the creators release documents
called a whitepaper. This whitepaper is a collection of technical, legal, and marketing
information [15]. It serves as a road map for the investors while trying to understand
the working and goals of a project.
•
Mining: The process of producing units of cryptocurrency through some kind of effort
is called mining. The effort is required because it ensures that people cannot create an
inﬁnite number of cryptocurrencies, which would reduce their value [6]. Mining also
includes other processes such as validating cryptocurrency transactions on blockchain
networks and adding them to the distributed ledger. Mining usually involves using
computer hardware to solve a hash with trillions of possible combinations. Miners
who work on this charge transaction fees as a reward for conﬁrming transactions.
•
Proof-of-Work: Proof-of-Work is a term that accounts for the work done by miners
to conﬁrm transactions in the network. Adding a block to the blockchain requires
the hashing of a block, as well as time and computing power. The effort taken for
this process, and efforts taken to solve hashes to create new coins, is referred to as
proof-of-work.
•
Double Spending: In traditional cryptocurrencies, when a user spends a particular
amount for a service, they cannot spend the same cash for a different service. When
it comes to cryptocurrency, the same coin can be copied multiple times and used
for different purposes. This serious issue is known as double spending. The ﬁrst
whitepaper proposing Bitcoin [1] solved this issue using a consensus mechanism of
conﬁrming transactions by multiple nodes in a network.
•
Gas: As mentioned above, miners charge transaction fees for conﬁrming transactions.
In Ethereum, this fee is referred to as gas [16]. It is important to always check for
enough gas before committing a transaction because transactions can be regarded as
invalid if the user does not have enough gas left in the account.
•
Wallets: A wallet is a storage location or device for securing cryptocurrencies securely.
Wallets are of two types: hot wallets and cold wallets. Hot wallets are online locations


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 5 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
5 of 20
generally offered by crypto exchange platforms or third parties with a private key,
and cold wallets are physical storage such as ﬂash drive or a hard drive to store crypto
assets [16] .
•
Bubble: A bubble is an economic cycle that is characterized by the rapid escalation of
market value, particularly in the price of assets. This fast inﬂation is followed by a
quick decrease in value or a contraction, which is sometimes referred to as a “crash”
or a “bubble burst”. Bubbles are generally a characteristic of a scam that is trying to
defraud wealthy investors.
•
Exchange: An exchange is a service that individuals and companies can use to trade
one cryptocurrency for other cryptocurrencies or ﬁat to a cryptocurrency.
•
Mixers: As we already know, the anonymity of a user is one of the highly preferred fea-
tures of cryptocurrency, and mixers are used to further strengthen it. Cryptocurrency
is deposited into a smart contract designed to execute a mixing transaction from a
single address. Users can withdraw previously deposited tokens from another address
after a predetermined period of time. Mixers have their own protocol for performing
the mixing action, which makes it difﬁcult to track the coins when they are put into a
mixer. This is exploited by scammers to escape with the coins that they managed to
scam from investors.
Now that we understand how blockchain and cryptocurrencies work, let us look at
different types of scams that have startled the ﬁnancial sector by stealing billions of dollars.
•
Ponzi schemes: A Ponzi scheme is a fraudulent investment scheme in which an
operator pays returns on investments from capital derived from new investors rather
than from legitimate investment proﬁts. Ponzi schemes generally fall apart when
there is not enough new capital to pay the ever-growing pool of existing investors.
Cryptocurrency Ponzi schemes are very common and have resulted in huge losses.
OneCoin, BitClub CoinUp, MMM Bitcoin, and PlusToken are popular Ponzi schemes
that defrauded investors out of billions of dollars worth of cryptocurrency [17].
•
Pump and dump schemes: Pump-and-dump schemes involve accumulating com-
modities over time, inﬂating their prices by spreading misinformation (pumping),
then selling them at higher prices to unsuspecting buyers (dumping). Due to artiﬁcial
inﬂation, the price usually drops, leaving buyers who bought based on false informa-
tion at a loss. In 2018, pump and dump schemes accumulated about $825 millions
from naive investors [7].
•
Initial Coin Offering (ICO) Scams: As already mentioned, ICOs can be launched by
anyone to raise investment for their project. Scammers take advantage of ICOs to
launch coins, mine coins, or create a service. In the end, they cash out the investor’s
money and leave the coins they sold with no value. ICO scams can be understood
with the help of critically reading the white papers and checking for misleading or
copied contents [15].
•
High-Yield Investment Programs (HYIP): high-yield investment programs (HYIPs)
are Ponzi schemes that promise high returns on investments in short periods of time.
These programs have cheated investors out of millions of dollars. On 23 July 2013, the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) charged a Bitcoin-based HYIP scammer
who offered a 7% daily interest rate to investors and cheated them out of 700,000 BTC,
valued at over 1 billion dollars today. [18].
•
Money laundering: Money laundering is the illegal process of making “dirty” money
appear legitimate instead of ill-gotten.
Criminals use a wide variety of money-
laundering techniques to make illegally obtained funds appear clean. Online banking
and cryptocurrencies have made it easier for criminals to transfer and withdraw money
without detection. The prevention of money laundering has become an international
effort and now includes terrorist funding among its targets. The ﬁnancial industry
also has its own set of strict anti-money laundering (AML) measures in place [19].
•
Crypto hacking: Crypto hacking refers to the hacking of user wallets to spend or
steal cryptocurrency from these accounts. The scammers usually use ransomware


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 6 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
6 of 20
or phishing techniques to steal the private keys of the users and hack into their
accounts [20].
•
Market manipulation: Market manipulation is the deliberate attempt to artiﬁcially
inﬂuence or interfere with asset prices. Scammers manipulate the market in multi-
ple ways:
-
Spooﬁng: Creating illusions to cheat investors. Scammers use dummy accounts
and bots to place large trades, which are canceled before they are ﬁlled, giving
other investors the impression that demand is either increasing or decreasing.
-
Front running: The practice of making trades based on knowledge of future
transactions. Miners and node operators have insights into upcoming trades,
which can be used for personal gains.
-
Churning: Excessive trading by a broker in a client’s crypto account to generate
additional commissions. Asset management ﬁrms can receive fees for managing
crypto holdings. Therefore, nefarious brokers could abuse a commission-based
payment structure to proﬁt off of unaware clients, which could also leave the
clients with tax liabilities.
•
Giveaway scams: A giveaway scam is very common nowadays. Scammers use social
media pages such as YouTube [21] and Twitter to attract investors by saying that a new
project or scam is highly functional. They point to websites with fake information and
give wallet addresses of scammers asking investors to send money for high returns.
Over the decade, several scams have stolen billions of dollars and caused severe harm
to the global economy. Research works have aimed to detect these scams using multiple
approaches and have succeeded in identifying them. Understanding the architecture and
functioning of blockchain technology, cryptocurrencies, scams, and detection techniques is
crucial to analyze these areas. Similarly, it is very important to know the current trends and
happenings on them to produce valid results on detection techniques that align with the
current day scenario. Keeping up to date with scams, currency values, market capital, and
the rankings of cryptocurrencies can help us understand the seriousness of the issue and
thus to evaluate detection models meticulously. Two types of data that can help us achieve
this are:
•
News articles, blogs, and reports published by trusted resources.
•
Ofﬁcial websites such as blockchain.com, coinmarketcap.com, and etherscan.io show
real-time transactions and values of cryptocurrencies equivalent to ﬁat currencies.
News articles published by ﬁnancial giants such as The Wall Street Journal, Bloomberg
Businessweek, Forbes, and Financial Times report detailed information on scams, their
technique, the value of money lost in the scam, the action taken against the scammers, and
the status of the victims and their funds. For example, [22] published by The Wall Street
Journal and [23] by Forbes unveil scams caused by a Ponzi Scheme and a Pig Butchering
activity (targeted scamming of rich individuals by scammers) respectively. The former
has managed to lure more than 100,000 investors with false promises. These articles also
talk about general market trends analyzing various aspects of the cryptocurrency industry,
such as [24], which provides insights into the effects of inﬂation, market sliding, and the
crippling of the economy on cryptocurrencies and how the value of cryptocurrencies has
dropped to 2/3rd of its value in June 2022. Similarly, [25] by Financial Times summarizes
how the lack of regulations leads to scams in crypto. These articles also categorize and
rank cryptocurrencies, projects, exchanges, and crypto-platforms [11] that can be useful for
future predictions.
Other than these news articles and reports, transactions on the public ledger of
blockchain are available in websites including blockchain.com [26], which can be used
as a source to validate legitimate transactions. Etherscan.io [27] also lists transactions in
Ethereum and its market capital. Exchanges such as Binance [28] and Coinbase [29] list
values of different coins equivalent to ﬁat currencies and aid in exchanging coins to ﬁat
currencies and vice versa. coinmarketcap.com [30] shows the market value of multiple


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 7 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
7 of 20
coins at any point of the day and helps investors to decide the best options to invest in.
In general, investopedia.com provides deﬁnitions, explanations, and examples of various
cryptocurrency-related concepts that help investors and researchers to understand the
technology better.
Governments, big corporations, ofﬁcials, and investment-advising agencies are work-
ing towards building regulations and have put forward measures such as anti-money
laundering (AML) and know your customer (KYC) to limit these scams. We will be looking
at works that have applied computing solutions to detect these scams along with similar
surveys that have aimed to compile data that is available in the next section.
3. Related Work
Blockchain technology and cryptocurrencies have attracted research attention over the
past decade. In an effort to collect and compile the research works, we have categorized
them based on their purpose and approach to the problems. The categories we have
considered are given in Table 1.
Table 1. Categories of research works and peer-reviewed articles.
Category
References
Textbooks, architectures, and processes
[1,6,7,9,12,14]
Existing surveys, literature reviews, and analysis publications
[5,31–40]
Detection techniques on scams in cryptocurrencies using machine
learning algorithms
[18,19,41–65]
Other type of approaches to solve scams
[15,66–68]
To understand the fundamental concepts and workings of blockchain technology
and cryptocurrencies, we have used textbooks, glossaries, and peer-reviewed articles.
The ﬁrst whitepaper published by Satoshi Nakamoto in 2008 introduced blockchain and
Bitcoin. This paper provides detailed information on the working of the technology and
its concepts. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) released a glossary [6] in the Annual
National Seminar in 2018 that deﬁnes all of the important cryptocurrency-related terms.
The authors of [7,9,12] explain the working of a blockchain, the consensus mechanism, and
how transactions are carried out for different services. Iansiti and Lakhani in [7] compared
the growth of blockchain technology to the invention of emails and have provided insights
to support the fact that cryptocurrencies will be the currencies of the future. In [12], Yuan
and Wang provided a detailed explanation of the different layers in the architecture of the
blockchain and its types, which help in identifying threats for different services.
In the literature, several works have already aimed to study, compare, and compile
existing research on blockchains and cryptocurrencies. There are surveys, literature reviews,
and conceptual papers that have analyzed different areas of this technology and the scams
that devalue them. Few publications look into all the cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin and
Ethereum, while others focus on one particular coin. Similarly, they also look into different
types of scams and produce an analysis of each scam, or they choose any scam such as
Ponzi schemes or money laundering.
Surveys that analyze all cryptocurrencies, the scams that occur in them, and the
defensive mechanisms are given in [31,37,38]. These surveys approach the technology
and scams in different ways. In [31], Phan et al. studied scams and common issues by
analyzing tweets on the blockchain. For the period of 8th November to 31st December
2018, over 2 million tweets mentioning ‘blockchain’ as a keyword were collected using
a tweet listener created using Apache Flume. Observations of their analysis concluded
that 69% of the tweets on the blockchain were negative. A systematic literature review by
Badawi and Jourdan [37] identiﬁed several peer-reviewed articles on scams and defensive
mechanisms. In this paper, a variety of information and statistics on different groups
of peer-reviewed articles were provided. UmaMaheshwaran et al. in [38] conducted a


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 8 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
8 of 20
survey on understanding the types of mechanisms used and their effectiveness in detecting
scams. Survey questions were posted to a group of 75 people who traded cryptocurrencies
and had blockchain knowledge. The observations of this survey stated that over 35%
of the respondents believed that machine learning methods are useful to detect fraud
in cryptocurrencies.
The importance of regulations, international standards, and authorization over cryp-
tocurrencies are stated by [32,34]. Teichmann and Falker in [32] studied how cryptocurren-
cies are used for ﬁnancial crimes and proposed a more effective international standard for
regulation. This study talks about the mindsets of criminals, experts, and authorities and
how they can help in proposing regulations. In [34], the problem of money laundering is ex-
posed, and the open doors in blockchain technology are discussed by Dupuis and Gleason.
This work also talks about the importance of regulations for exchanging cryptocurrencies.
Surveys such as [35,36,40] look into cryptojacking, exchange scams, and Ponzi Schemes,
respectively. Cryptojacking is the practice of unauthorized use of computation resources
of individuals or organizations to mine cryptocurrencies. Jayasinghe and Poravi, in [35],
aimed to look at cryptojacking instances on the cloud infrastructure and discussed various
platforms as well as mechanisms used to hack into cloud servers. In a nutshell, this paper
introduced cryptojacking, analyzed the attack on cloud resources, reviewed the existing
literature, talked about research gaps, and suggested a detection system using behavioral
analysis for the future. In [36], Xia et al. exposed scams in exchanges and fake exchanges
that operated to steal cryptocurrencies. The authors have identiﬁed 1595 exchange scams,
of which over 60% of the scams are unknown, and 300+ fake exchange apps, which are
even available in legitimate play stores such as google play. This work used a clustering
approach to group these scams and fake apps into families and ended up with 94 scam
families and 30 fake app families. As per this paper, the ﬁnancial loss due to the exchange
scams at the time of 2018 was evaluated at 520K USD.
Xia et al. in [39] reported that the number of scams and losses increased drastically
during the COVID-19 period. This research compiled different types of scams that occurred
in cryptocurrencies. During the world crisis, scammers took advantage of and unleashed
several crypto crimes using the name of COVID-19. There were 195 scams reported,
including 91 token scams (ICOs), 9 blackmail scams, 14 malware scams, 9 Ponzi schemes,
and 53 donation scams that used COVID-19 as bait. The authors studied these scams,
analyzed their characteristics, and explored the tricks and social engineering activities
the scammers used. While other papers focus on scams and detection techniques, [5]
by Adhami et al. look into the brighter side of cryptocurrencies and produce a survey
on the success of startups that use cryptocurrencies to raise investments. The authors
proposed a hypothesis that marks the success of an ICO based on the availability of future
outlook, whitepapers, and the source code of the project to the investors. Additionally,
other characteristics such as presale, bonus schemes, and advantages over services such as
marketplaces and coupons increase the success of an ICO.
Detection techniques use multiple approaches to spot scams in cryptocurrencies based
on various aspects. While the next section explains each technique, the datasets used
and the features extracted, in this section, let us look at some common observations in
these techniques that helped us to identify these publications. Generally, these algorithms
look into one type of scam and try to train a model to detect the scam. For example, [19]
proposed a model to identify money laundering, while [59] looked into pump and dumps.
Table 2 provides a list of scams and references that are studied in this survey. Another
common observation is that these techniques also look into one type of cryptocurrency
such as Bitcoin to identify malicious activities in accounts and detect transactions as valid
or invalid. Bitcoin and Ethereum are the most commonly studied cryptocurrencies in
the literature.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 9 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
9 of 20
Table 2. Types of scams and their references.
Category
References
Ponzi Schemes
[42,48–50,58,63,65]
Money Laundering
[19,54,69–71]
Pump and Dump
[43,59–61]
Cryptojacking
[46,51–53]
Phishing
[62,68,72,73]
Fake Wallets/Accounts
[55,57,64,74]
Exchange Scams
[36]
HYIP
[18,75]
Ransomware
[56]
DDoS attack
[45]
Compared with previous surveys, in this work we have studied scams and solutions
in cryptocurrencies in more detail and categorized existing works on each scam and
the machine learning methods adapted to address each type of scam. We have also
discussed the type of features, transaction data, and outcomes of these models, which are
not presented in previous surveys.
Table 3 provides the list of cryptocurrencies and references that examined the curren-
cies, respectively. In this section, we have categorized and explained the resources we have
considered for our survey.
With a background of concepts and a review of literature, the next section discusses
the solutions proposed to address the scams and surveys their performances.
Table 3. Types of cryptocurrencies and their references.
Category
References
Bitcoin
[18,19,41,42,44,47,54,57,59,75]
Ethereum
[48–50,55,58,62–64,74]
Cryptocurrencies in general
[43,46,52,53,56,60,61]
4. Performance Analysis of Detection Models
As the use of digital wallets and cryptocurrencies increased, the number of scams
and felonious activities hindering their growth also increased. According to a report by
CNBC [76], scammers have cheated more than $14 billion in 2021, with a 516% raise from
2020. Rug pulls, Ponzi schemes, and pyramid schemes have contributed largely to this
loss. This report also said that crypto-related crimes were at an all time high during the time,
which was when the scams that took advantage of COVID 19 situations were at a peak. Scams
and fraud have always existed in society. Experts say that these scams have evolved with
technology, but their motive to defraud innocent people or investors for their own gain has
not changed. Governments, corporations, investment advising companies, and authorities
are always on the hunt to identify these scams for the wellness of the economy and people
by observing these characteristics. Research has been conducted to develop computational
models that can detect these scams as well as prevent them.
In this section, we have categorized the models based on the type of scam they try to
detect and analyzed their performance metrics, feature extraction methods, and datasets
used. This effort aims to provide a compilation of existing scam detection models that
perform optimally under a variety of conditions. As a part of our evaluation of these
models, we considered performance metrics such as precision, recall, and F1 score. A
model’s precision is how accurate it is in predicting one particular type of event. Recall


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 10 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
10 of 20
is essentially a measure of how often a model can correctly identify a category based on
the data it receives. The harmonic mean of precision and recall is widely used to compare
different models and algorithms. Our study has also addressed these models and classiﬁed
them based on the types of cryptocurrencies in which they have attempted to detect scams.
We have categorized each machine learning model into the type of scam it aims to
detect. The results of their efficiency were obtained from the results discussed in each paper.
The primary reasons to compare the results from different works, which are executed on
different datasets, are as follows: the datasets used by these works consisted of scam-related
transactions and valid transactions of the same type of cryptocurrencies or the same type
of scam. The features used in these models are similar, and the algorithms used have the
same type of approach. These models are intended to detect cryptocurrency scams, and the
success rate of each of them indicates how accurate and efficient they are at doing so.
4.1. Ponzi Schemes
As mentioned in the previous sections, Ponzi schemes are one of the most common
types of scams that have embezzled millions of dollars over the decade. Research studies
and detection models have identiﬁed Ponzi schemes largely in both Bitcoin and Ethereum.
In order to detect these scams, machine learning models have differentiated two types of
features and have also tried to compare their impact on identifying scams. In Ethereum,
smart contracts have examined datasets, then features have been separated into two cat-
egories: code and account [48–50]. In code features, the bytecode of the smart contracts
is analyzed to identify patterns or commonly occurring pieces of code that can be used
to differentiate a Ponzi scheme and a non-Ponzi scheme smart contract. A performance
metric analysis of code features of multiple models surveyed is shown in Figure 1. Account
features look into behavioral activities such as balance, transaction frequencies, ETH in,
and ETH out, for detecting fraudulent activities. Figure 2 shows the analysis of account
features, and Figure 3 provides the analysis of both features combined.
In [50], Chen et al. collected real-world data that can be reused for future research
and proposed a detection technique to identify Ponzi schemes. Two types of datasets were
collected manually by checking open-source smart contracts on the Ethereum platform. The
ﬁrst dataset used to build a classiﬁcation model consisted of all of the labels and features of
the 3780 open-source contracts. Another dataset contained code features of all of the smart
contracts (including open-source contracts and hidden-source contracts), which were used
to approximate the number of smart Ponzi schemes running on the Ethereum platform.
This paper used multiple machine-learning algorithms to build models and compared their
performances for three categories of features. The three categories were using account and
code features separately and combined them to predict the illicit smart contract. Chen et al.
authored [48] as preliminary research to construct the dataset and build a detection model
using XGBoost. In a similar fashion, Jung et al., in [49], developed detection models by
analyzing the same three categories of features. The authors focused on identifying Ponzi
schemes right from the day they are added. They compared the 0-day performance to the
248-day performance on the smart contracts by using the level of features available using
the J48 decision tree, Random Forest, and Stochastic Gradient Descent algorithms to detect
Ponzi schemes.
In [42], Bartoletti et al. created a dataset of features of real-world Ponzi schemes,
which they constructed by analyzing the Bitcoin blockchain and the transactions used
to perform the scams. They approached the problem as a binary classiﬁcation problem
and experimented with three classiﬁcation models to identify the best performance. In
this effort, the authors achieved an accuracy of detecting 31 out of 32 Ponzi schemes in
their dataset. Hu et al., in [58], proposed SCSGuard, a novel deep-learning scam-detection
framework that analyzed code features of smart contracts to detect any kind of scam in
them. The framework was based on n-gram features and attention neural networks of the
bytecode of the smart contracts to detect scams. The model achieved an accuracy of 92.2%
to detect Ponzi schemes and an accuracy of 94.7% to detect Honey pots.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 11 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
11 of 20
Figure 1. F1 score comparison of Ponzi schemes with account features.
Figure 2. F1 score comparison of Ponzi schemes with code features.
Figure 3. F1 score comparison of Ponzi schemes with account and code features.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 12 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
12 of 20
4.2. Money Laundering
Money laundering activities have caused serious losses in cryptocurrencies and have
attracted research to study their characteristics and build detection models. In general,
models proposed to detect money laundering try to classify transactions into illicit and
valid classes and primarily use account features such as account balance, money in, and
money out for training. In [19,54], Alarab et al. explore the Elliptic dataset, which is
derived from the Bitcoin blockchain and represents transactions in the form of a directed
graph network of nodes representing transactions from sources to destinations. The graph
structure of the dataset motivates them to use neural networks to develop a detection model.
The proposed model [19] combines graph convolutional networks with linear layers and
multilayer perceptron (MLP) to provide 97.4% accuracy in identifying illicit transactions
in the Elliptic dataset. In [54], a comparison of supervised learning models—Random
Forest, Extra Trees, Bagging, AdaBoost, Gradient Boosting, and k- Nearest Neighbors—are
performed, and an ensemble learning model combining Random Forest, Extra Trees, and
Bagging is proposed to detect money laundering activities.
A comparison of the performance metrics of all the models identiﬁed under the money
laundering scams is displayed Figure 4. Lorentz et al., in [69], explained the disadvantage
of supervised learning models when labels are scarce in the elliptic dataset. With a realistic
label condition, they proved that active learning methods detected illicit transactions with
high accuracy with 5% of labels used by supervised learning. The authors also proved that
unsupervised learning models have poor performance in a similar environment. Badawi
and Al-Haija, in [70], also used an elliptic dataset to build machine learning models to
detect money laundering activities. This paper compared the performance of the neural
network and decision tree models in detecting felonious activities. For providing multi-class
classiﬁcations using a probability distribution function that assigns every output class a
probability value, the authors have used Softmax classiﬁers and showed that shallow neural
networks and decision trees achieve classiﬁcation accuracy capped at 89.9% and 93.4%,
respectively. Baek et al., in [71], used an unsupervised learning expectation-maximization
algorithm to cluster the data and extract features of Ethereum transactions in the real
world blockchain ledgers. With the features engineered from the unsupervised learning,
anomaly detection is performed using the Random Forest algorithm to identify discernible
transactions.
Figure 4. F1 score comparison of money laundering.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 13 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
13 of 20
4.3. Pump and Dump
Pump and dump scams have now become common in Bitcoin and Ethereum blockchains.
The Mt. Gox Exchange scam, which was a notorious scam in which millions of dollars was
embezzled, was studied by Chen et al. in [61]. This work discusses the importance of bringing
regulations to the crypto market. The authors proposed an improved Apriori algorithm to
detect cryptocurrency pump and dump schemes. Observations concluded that the Mt. Gox
exchange had fake trading volume. The model explored transactions and their relations to
user ids to identify patterns in transaction records such as buying or selling by the users at
the same time and the number of Bitcoins bought or sold and identified the pump and dump
phases of the scam.
4.4. Phishing
Machine learning models have exploited the network features mainly to identify
phishing scams. As we know that phishing scams start from fake links on web pages and
social media posts to a scammers address, these models target the network features. In [62],
Yuan et al. created a network of transactions as their dataset and proposed a model that uses
the node2vec network embedding method to extract features from the transactions and uses
one-class SVM (support vector machine) to classify the user accounts into phishing accounts
and other accounts. Similarly, in [68], J. Wu et al. uses trans2vec network embedding to
extract features and uses Logistic Regression, Naive Bayes, Isolation Forest, and One-Class
SVM algorithms to build models and compare their results in detecting phishing scams.
Figure 5 shows the comparison of the F1 score comparison of these models. Wen et al.,
in [72], extracts both the network and account features of transactions to propose a phishing
detection framework and an adversarial attack framework and deﬁne metrics to show that
the model is optimal to detect phishing activities in Ethereum. Transaction data publicly
available in etherscan.io and other websites are widely used to form datasets to identify
phishing addresses and transactions related to them.
Figure 5. F1 score comparison of phishing scams.
4.5. Fake Wallets and Accounts
Fake user accounts and wallets are considered a problem for the blockchain by several
researchers as they hinder the working of the technology and makes it vulnerable to
scams and other criminal activities. To identify fake accounts, models have widely used
the account features and used machine learning algorithms to detect the fake accounts.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 14 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
14 of 20
Farrugia et al., in [55], used the XGBoost classiﬁer to detect fraudulent accounts based
on the transaction history of these accounts in Ethereum and achieved an accuracy of
96.3%. The authors also provided insights into important features that can help build a
highly accurate detection model and create a compiled dataset for future research. In [57],
Shayegan et al. proposed a collective anomaly approach to identify fake users in Bitcoins.
This approach used the trimmed_Kmeans algorithm for data clustering and successfully
identiﬁed 14 users who owned multiple accounts that committed fraud in 9 different cases.
The authors have also discussed the importance of reducing the processing power and
computational time in the models and proved that the proposed model has detected a
very large number of fake users even with a reduced number of records and features from
the state-of-art models. Ostapowicz and Zbikowski in [74] apply supervised learning
techniques to detect fraudulent accounts on Ethereum. They also compared the working
capabilities of Random Forest, the support vector machine, and XGBoost classiﬁers on
a dataset of more than 300 thousand accounts. This work also discussed the sensitivity
analysis of these models by examining their feature dependency and system performance.
Kumar et al., in [64], detect suspicious accounts on the Ethereum blockchain by analyzing
the two types of accounts–Externally Owned Accounts (EOA) and smart contract accounts.
After preprocessing the data for both types of analysis, the authors use kNN, Decision Tree,
Random Forest, and XGBoost classiﬁers using Python’s Scikit-learn library. Figure 6 shows
the comparison of the accuracy comparison of these models.
Figure 6. Accuracy comparison of fake wallets and accounts.
4.6. Cryptojacking
Cryptojacking refers to mining attacks that are common nowadays in which cryp-
tocurrencies are stolen directly from users’ CPU or computational power without their
knowledge. This attack leads to several losses, and models have been proposed to iden-
tify them. In [53], Zimba et al. demonstrate that integrating semi-supervised learning
with complex network theory modeling effectively detects crypto-mining activities. The
proposed approach uses network characteristic features of the dataset, creates clusters
using the Shared Nearest Neighbor algorithm, and uses the KNN classiﬁer to train a model
to detect crypto-mining activities. In short, the semi-supervised learning approach uses
the unsupervised learning method to extract features from the unlabeled dataset, and the
supervised model classiﬁes this data instances of crypto mining using complex network


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 15 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
15 of 20
characteristics features. OUTGUARD is an automated cryptojacking detection system
proposed by Kharraz et al. in [46] that uses seven distinctive features with an SVM classiﬁ-
cation model. The authors created a dataset using real-world data and achieved a 97.9%
true positive rate and a 1.1% false positive rate. Similarly, CapJack, proposed by Ning et al.
in [52], is another in-browser malicious cryptocurrency mining detecting model that uses
neural networks to detect illegal crypto mining. This model has high accuracy—from 87%
to 99% within a window of 11 s when executed on real-time browser data.
From our analysis, it is evident that scams and scammers use different approaches
and exploit the varied characteristics of blockchain technology to fraud investors. In this
section, we discussed different scam types and the models that attempted to identify the
patterns and characteristics of these scams to successfully detect them in real-world datasets.
In addition, it is also worth mentioning that most of the machine-learning models have
focused on Bitcoin and Ethereum. Several other observations that are worth mentioning
are discussed in the following section of this paper. In this section, the models that perform
best under multiple categories are also highlighted.
5. Results and Observation
From the previous section, a review of existing scams, their characteristics, the models
used to approach each type of scam, and their performances have been attained. By
categorizing the scams, several observations and conclusions are obtained from these
models, which will be discussed in this section. In general, we can see that research works
have primarily focused on Bitcoin and Ethereum cryptocurrencies, which constitute more
than 45% of the capital value of the cryptocurrency market. As already mentioned, the
scam rates have drastically increased in recent years. The COVID 19 era sparked a golden
age of crypto scams [39]. It was during this time that several scam techniques such as
wash trading, giveaways, emergency scams, and referrals saw peaks. From 2008 to 2013,
over 500 Ponzi schemes scammed over $50 billion , which is exactly when the very ﬁrst
cryptocurrency Bitcoin was introduced and started growing. Over the decade, detection
models using machine learning techniques have been developed to detect these scams and
have achieved optimal results.
As we saw that Ponzi schemes contribute a high percentage of scams, machine learning
models have achieved high efﬁciencies in detecting them. From the performance analysis
conducted, we can see that to detect Ponzi schemes, these models have categorized the
features of the dataset into account and code subsets. From [48–50], it is evident that code
features and a combination of both the features perform with high efﬁciency. Random
Forest, J48 Decision Trees, and Stochastic Gradient Descent algorithms have achieved very
high F1 scores of 93%, 97%, and 96%, respectively, while using a combination of both the
features. The XGBoost algorithm has performed fairly better when compared with the
other algorithms mentioned in the performance analysis of the Ponzi schemes. The deep
learning application of neural networks has also demonstrated very good performance,
producing 96.3% precision, 97.8% recall, and an F1 score of 97.1%.
Money laundering has always been a problem for ﬁnancial stability and has created
issues with cryptocurrencies. As mentioned in the analysis section, the Elliptic dataset
has been commonly used to develop a detection model. Binary classiﬁcation of valid
and illicit transactions has been applied to detect money laundering. Clustering the data
using an expectation-maximization algorithm to extract features to detect laundering with
Random Forest by Baek et al., [71] has shown highly efﬁcient performance with a F1 score
of 92%. Badawi and Al-Haija’s comparison of neural networks and decision trees has
also performed well with F1 scores of 89.7% and 93.5%, respectively, in identifying money
laundering [70]. Additionally, algorithms such as Extra Trees, Bagging, Ada Boost, and the
ensemble method in [54] have done well, with F1 scores over 80%.
Generally, network features are used to detect phishing, while account features are
used to detect fake accounts. One class SVM algorithm used by both [62,68] has performed
well, with F1 scores of 84.6% and 90.8%, respectively, to determine phishing. Both of


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 16 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
16 of 20
these papers use network embedding methods to extract features and have performed
better than [72], which used mining techniques. In the case of fake wallets, all of the
surveyed models have shown excellent performances, with an accuracy of over 89.3%.
In [74], the Random Forest algorithm used on account features of a dataset with more than
300 thousand accounts achieved 99.51% accuracy, which constitutes very high efﬁciency
when compared to any other model in any category.
Regarding cryptojacking or illegal mining, performance analysis has identiﬁed rea-
sonably performing models. Similarly, in the case of other scams such as HYIP [18,75] and
Pump and dumps [61] we have identiﬁed research works that have attempted to iden-
tify the characteristics and developed techniques that detect the fraudulent transactions.
The performance analysis section helped us to come to these conclusions, which were
discussed in this section. Features, datasets, and important characteristics were thus listed
successfully.
Depending on the type of scam, features were selected by each model to detect them.
Some common features that may be useful in identifying scams include:
•
Transaction amount: Large transactions or transactions with unusual amounts may
indicate a scam.
•
Destination address: Scammers often use addresses that are known to be associated
with scams, so checking the destination address against a blacklist of known scam
addresses can be useful.
•
Sender address: The identity of the sender may also provide clues about the nature
of the transaction. For example, if the sender’s address is associated with a known
scammer, this may indicate a scam.
•
Time of transaction: Scammers often act quickly, so transactions that occur over a
short period of time are more likely to be scams.
•
Contract code: The code associated with the transaction can provide additional in-
formation about its purpose. For example, if the contract code is associated with a
known scam, this may indicate a scam.
•
Network behavior: The behavior of the transaction on the network, such as the number
of inputs and outputs, can also provide clues about its nature.
•
Previous transactions: The history of the addresses involved in the transaction, in-
cluding the amount and number of previous transactions, can provide additional
information about the nature of the transaction.
These features are commonly divided into categories such as code features, network
features, and transaction features and are used to detect scams in cryptocurrencies.
We believe that this survey will help researchers understand the existing scams,
detection models, and techniques available in cryptocurrency technology and provide
insights and ideas with which to work further on them. In the next section, we give our
concluding comments and suggestions for further research in this area.
6. Conclusions
In this survey, we have understood the key concepts of blockchain technology and
cryptocurrencies, studied the characteristics of scams in them, and seen how machine
learning models exploit these characteristics to detect scams. With this review, we can
clearly see that the techniques used to detect these frauds have also evolved and have
performed very efﬁciently. Our performance analysis has identiﬁed the best performing
models, datasets, and features for various scam types. We have used measures such as
accuracy, precision, recall, and F1 score to compare these models. Beyond these metrics, a
machine learning model’s performance can be validated by other attributes such as time
complexity, the number of nodes used, the number of features used, the number of epochs,
computational power used, and so on. Beyond machine learning, there are detection
models or techniques that identify scam activities by investigating fake websites, social
media posts, giveaway links, phishing links, and forwarded messages. These techniques
can also be examined and used for further research or surveys.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 17 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
17 of 20
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, L.P.K.; methodology, L.P.K.; investigation, L.P.K.; data
curation, L.P.K.; writing—original draft preparation, L.P.K.; writing—review and editing, I.V., S.R.
and S.A.; visualization, L.P.K.; supervision, I.V., S.R. and S.A.; project administration, I.V., S.R. and
S.A. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1.
Nakamoto, S. Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System. 2008. Available online: https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf (accessed
on 21 December 2022).
2.
Statista.com. Cryptocurrency Statistics from Statista. Available online: https://www.statista.com/topics/4495/cryptocurrencies/
(accessed on 21 December 2022).
3.
Coinmarketcap.com. Rankings, Values and Statistics from Coinmarketcap.com. Available online: Coinmarketcap.com (accessed
on 21 December 2022).
4.
Commission, F.T. Data Spotlight, Reports Show Scammers Cashing in on Crypto Craze. 2022. Available online: https://www.ftc.
gov/news-events/data-visualizations/data-spotlight/2022/06/reports-show-scammers-cashing-crypto-craze (accessed on 21
December 2022).
5.
Adhami, S.; Giudici, G.; Martinazzi, S. Why do businesses go crypto? An empirical analysis of initial coin offerings. J. Econ. Bus.
2018, 100, 64–75. [CrossRef]
6.
United States Sentencing Commission. Bitcoin Glossary: 2018 Annual National Seminar; United States Sentencing Commission:
Washington, DC, USA, 2018.
7.
Iansiti, M.; Lakhani, K.R. The truth about blockchain. Harv. Bus. Rev. 2017, 95, 118–127.
8.
Tharani, J.S.; Charles, E.Y.A.; Hóu, Z.; Palaniswami, M.; Muthukkumarasamy, V. Graph Based Visualisation Techniques for
Analysis of Blockchain Transactions. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE 46th Conference on Local Computer Networks (LCN),
Edmonton, AB, Canada, 4–7 October 2021; pp. 427–430. [CrossRef]
9.
Islam, M.N.; Hossen, M.G.S.; Baidya, S.P.; Emon, M.A.U.; Hossain, M.S. A Framework for Tracing the Real Identity of a Bitcoin
Scammer. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Computer, Communication, Chemical, Materials and Electronic
Engineering (IC4ME2), Rajshahi, Bangladesh, 26–27 December 2021; pp. 1–4. [CrossRef]
10.
coindesk.com. How Crypto Could Spearhead Retail Payments in 2022. Available online: https://www.coindesk.com/layer2
/paymentsweek/2022/04/29/how-crypto-could-spearhead-retail-payments-in-2022/ (accessed on 21 December 2022).
11.
Forbes. Top 10 Cryptocurrencies of 2022. Available online: https://www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/cryptocurrency/top-10
-cryptocurrencies/ (accessed on 21 December 2022).
12.
Yuan, Y.; Wang, F.Y. Blockchain and Cryptocurrencies: Model, Techniques, and Applications. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Syst.
2018, 48, 1421–1428. [CrossRef]
13.
Wang, S.; Ouyang, L.; Yuan, Y.; Ni, X.; Han, X.; Wang, F.Y. Blockchain-Enabled Smart Contracts: Architecture, Applications, and
Future Trends. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Syst. 2019, 49, 2266–2277. [CrossRef]
14.
Investopedia. Initial Coin Offering (ICO): Coin Launch Deﬁned, with Examples. Available online: https://www.investopedia.
com/terms/i/initial-coin-offering-ico.asp#:~:text=An-initial-coin-offering-(ICO)-is-the-cryptocurrency-industry’s-equivalent,
a-way-to-raise-funds (accessed on 21 December 2022).
15.
Morin, A.; Vasek, M.; Moore, T. Detecting Text Reuse in Cryptocurrency Whitepapers.
In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE
International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), Sydney, Australia, 3–6 May 2021; pp. 1–5. [CrossRef]
16.
Forbes. Cryptocurrency Glossary of Terms and Acronyms. Available online: https://www.forbes.com/advisor/investing/
cryptocurrency/crypto-glossary/ (accessed on 21 December 2022).
17.
Mukherjee, S.; Larkin, C. Cryptocurrency Ponzi schemes. In Understanding Cryptocurrency Fraud; Corbet, S., Ed.; De Gruyter:
Berlin, Germany; Boston, MA, USA, 2022; pp. 111–120. [CrossRef]
18.
Toyoda, K.; Mathiopoulos, P.T.; Ohtsuki, T. A novel methodology for hyip operators’ Bitcoin addresses identiﬁcation. IEEE Access
2019, 7, 74835–74848. [CrossRef]
19.
Alarab, I.; Prakoonwit, S.; Nacer, M.I. Competence of graph convolutional networks for anti-money laundering in Bitcoin
blockchain. In Proceedings of the 2020 5th International Conference on Machine Learning Technologies, Beijing, China, 19–21
June 2020; pp. 23–27.
20.
Insider, B. 5 Crypto Scams to Know before You Start Trading Coins, Business Insider.
Available online: https://www.
businessinsider.com/personal-ﬁnance/crypto-scams (accessed on 21 December 2022).
21.
Vakilinia, I. Cryptocurrency Giveaway Scam with YouTube Live Stream.
In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE 13th Annual
Ubiquitous Computing, Electronics & Mobile Communication Conference (UEMCON), New York, NY, USA, 26–29 October 2022;
pp. 0195–0200.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 18 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
18 of 20
22.
The Wall Street Journal.
SEC Charges Trade Coin Club Founder, Promoters in $295 Million Bitcoin Fraud.
Available on-
line: https://www.wsj.com/articles/sec-charges-trade-coin-club-founder-promoters-in-295-million-Bitcoin-fraud-11667598
959?mod=business_minor_pos16 (accessed on 21 December 2022).
23.
Forbes.
How One Man Lost 1 Million Dollar to a Crypto ‘Super Scam’ Called Pig Butchering.
Available online: https:
//www.forbes.com/sites/cyrusfarivar/2022/09/09/pig-butchering-crypto-super-scam/?sh=3930764bec8e (accessed on 21
December 2022).
24.
The Wall Street Journal. The Crypto Party Is Over. Available online: https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-crypto-party-is-over-11
655524807 (accessed on 21 December 2022).
25.
Times, F. The Lawless World of Crypto Scams. Available online: https://www.ft.com/content/5987649e-9345-4eae-a4b8-9bfb0
142a2ab (accessed on 21 December 2022).
26.
Blockchain. Ofﬁcial Blockchain Website. Available online: www.blockchain.com (accessed on 21 December 2022).
27.
Etherscan.io. Ethereum Website. Available online: www.etherscan.io (accessed on 21 December 2022).
28.
Binance. Exchange Platform: Binance. Available online: https://www.binance.com/en (accessed on 21 December 2022).
29.
Coinbase. Exchange Platform: Coinbase. Available online: https://www.coinbase.com/ (accessed on 21 December 2022).
30.
Coinmarketcap. Coinmarketcap.com. Available online: https://www.coinmarketcap.com/ (accessed on 21 December 2022).
31.
Phan, L.; Li, S.; Mentzer, K. Blockchain technology and the current discussion on fraud. Comput. Inf. Syst. J. 2019, 20, 8–20.
32.
Teichmann, F.M.J.; Falker, M.C. Cryptocurrencies and ﬁnancial crime: Solutions from Liechtenstein. J. Money Laund. Control 2021,
24, 775–788. [CrossRef]
33.
Desmond, D.B.; Lacey, D.; Salmon, P. Evaluating cryptocurrency laundering as a complex socio-technical system: A systematic
literature review. J. Money Laund. Control 2019, 22, 480–497. [CrossRef]
34.
Dupuis, D.; Gleason, K. Money laundering with cryptocurrency: Open doors and the regulatory dialectic. J. Financ. Crime 2020,
28, 60–74. [CrossRef]
35.
Jayasinghe, K.; Poravi, G. A survey of attack instances of cryptojacking targeting cloud infrastructure. In Proceedings of the 2020
2nd Asia Paciﬁc Information Technology Conference, Bali Island, Indonesia, 17–19 January 2020; pp. 100–107.
36.
Xia, P.; Wang, H.; Zhang, B.; Ji, R.; Gao, B.; Wu, L.; Luo, X.; Xu, G. Characterizing cryptocurrency exchange scams. Comput. Secur.
2020, 98, 101993. [CrossRef]
37.
Badawi, E.; Jourdan, G.V. Cryptocurrencies emerging threats and defensive mechanisms: A systematic literature review. IEEE
Access 2020, 8, 200021–200037. [CrossRef]
38.
UmaMaheswaran, S.; Uike, D.; Ramachandran, K.; Tharangini, A.; Suba, T.; Verma, D. The Critical Understanding on the
Emerging Threats and Defensive Aspects in Cryptocurrencies using Machine Learning Techniques. In Proceedings of the 2022
2nd International Conference on Advance Computing and Innovative Technologies in Engineering (ICACITE), Greater Noida,
India, 28–29 April 2022; pp. 1938–1942.
39.
Xia, P.; Wang, H.; Luo, X.; Wu, L.; Zhou, Y.; Bai, G.; Xu, G.; Huang, G.; Liu, X. Don’t ﬁsh in troubled waters! characterizing
coronavirus-themed cryptocurrency scams. In Proceedings of the 2020 APWG Symposium on Electronic Crime Research (eCrime),
Boston, MA, USA, 16–19 November 2020; pp. 1–14.
40.
Bartoletti, M.; Carta, S.; Cimoli, T.; Saia, R. Dissecting Ponzi schemes on Ethereum: Identiﬁcation, analysis, and impact. Future
Gener. Comput. Syst. 2020, 102, 259–277. [CrossRef]
41.
Toyoda, K.; Ohtsuki, T.; Mathiopoulos, P.T. Multi-class Bitcoin-enabled service identiﬁcation based on transaction history
summarization. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings) and IEEE Green
Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom) and IEEE Smart Data
(SmartData), Halifax, NS, Canada, 30 July–3 August 2018; pp. 1153–1160.
42.
Bartoletti, M.; Pes, B.; Serusi, S. Data mining for detecting Bitcoin ponzi schemes. In Proceedings of the 2018 Crypto Valley
Conference on Blockchain Technology (CVCBT), Zug, Switzerland, 20–22 June 2018; pp. 75–84.
43.
Victor, F.; Hagemann, T. Cryptocurrency pump and dump schemes: Quantiﬁcation and detection. In Proceedings of the 2019
International Conference on Data Mining Workshops (ICDMW), Beijing, China, 8–11 November 2019; pp. 244–251.
44.
Vasek, M.; Thornton, M.; Moore, T. Empirical analysis of denial-of-service attacks in the Bitcoin ecosystem. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Financial Cryptography and Data Security, Christ Church, Barbados, 3–7 March 2014; pp. 57–71.
45.
Baek, U.J.; Ji, S.H.; Park, J.T.; Lee, M.S.; Park, J.S.; Kim, M.S. DDoS attack detection on Bitcoin ecosystem using deep-learning. In
Proceedings of the 2019 20th Asia-Paciﬁc Network Operations and Management Symposium (APNOMS), Matsue, Japan, 18–20
September 2019; pp. 1–4.
46.
Kharraz, A.; Ma, Z.; Murley, P.; Lever, C.; Mason, J.; Miller, A.; Borisov, N.; Antonakakis, M.; Bailey, M. Outguard: Detecting
in-browser covert cryptocurrency mining in the wild. In Proceedings of the World Wide Web Conference, San Francisco, CA,
USA, 13–17 May 2019; pp. 840–852.
47.
Yin, H.S.; Vatrapu, R. A ﬁrst estimation of the proportion of cybercriminal entities in the Bitcoin ecosystem using supervised
machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), Boston, MA, USA, 11–14
December 2017; pp. 3690–3699.
48.
Chen, W.; Zheng, Z.; Cui, J.; Ngai, E.; Zheng, P.; Zhou, Y. Detecting ponzi schemes on ethereum: Towards healthier blockchain
technology. In Proceedings of the 2018 World Wide Web Conference, Lyon, France, 23–27 April 2018; pp. 1409–1418.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 19 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
19 of 20
49.
Jung, E.; Le Tilly, M.; Gehani, A.; Ge, Y. Data mining-based ethereum fraud detection.
In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain), Atlanta, GA, USA, 14–17 July 2019; pp. 266–273.
50.
Chen, W.; Zheng, Z.; Ngai, E.C.H.; Zheng, P.; Zhou, Y. Exploiting blockchain data to detect smart ponzi schemes on ethereum.
IEEE Access 2019, 7, 37575–37586. [CrossRef]
51.
Gangwal, A.; Conti, M. Cryptomining cannot change its spots: Detecting covert cryptomining using magnetic side-channel. IEEE
Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur. 2019, 15, 1630–1639. [CrossRef]
52.
Ning, R.; Wang, C.; Xin, C.; Li, J.; Zhu, L.; Wu, H. Capjack: Capture in-browser cryptojacking by deep capsule network through
behavioral analysis. In Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM 2019—IEEE Conference on Computer Communications, Paris, France,
29 April–2 May 2019; pp. 1873–1881.
53.
Zimba, A.; Chishimba, M.; Ngongola-Reinke, C.; Mbale, T.F. Demystifying cryptocurrency mining attacks: A semi-supervised
learning approach based on digital forensics and dynamic network characteristics. arXiv 2021, arXiv:2102.10634.
54.
Alarab, I.; Prakoonwit, S.; Nacer, M.I. Comparative analysis using supervised learning methods for anti-money laundering in
Bitcoin. In Proceedings of the 2020 5th International Conference on Machine Learning Technologies, Beijing, China, 19–21 June
2020; pp. 11–17.
55.
Farrugia, S.; Ellul, J.; Azzopardi, G. Detection of illicit accounts over the Ethereum blockchain. Expert Syst. Appl. 2020, 150, 113318.
[CrossRef]
56.
Goyal, P.S.; Kakkar, A.; Vinod, G.; Joseph, G. Crypto-ransomware detection using behavioural analysis. In Reliability, Safety and
Hazard Assessment for Risk-Based Technologies; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2020; pp. 239–251.
57.
Shayegan, M.J.; Sabor, H.R.; Uddin, M.; Chen, C.L. A Collective Anomaly Detection Technique to Detect Crypto Wallet Frauds on
Bitcoin Network. Symmetry 2022, 14, 328. [CrossRef]
58.
Hu, H.; Bai, Q.; Xu, Y. Scsguard: Deep scam detection for ethereum smart contracts. In Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM
2022—IEEE Conference on Computer Communications Workshops (INFOCOM WKSHPS), Virtual, 2–5 May 2022; pp. 1–6.
59.
La Morgia, M.; Mei, A.; Sassi, F.; Stefa, J. Pump and dumps in the Bitcoin era: Real time detection of cryptocurrency market
manipulations. In Proceedings of the 2020 29th International Conference on Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN),
Honolulu, HI, USA, 3–6 August 2020; pp. 1–9.
60.
Mirtaheri, M.; Abu-El-Haija, S.; Morstatter, F.; Ver Steeg, G.; Galstyan, A. Identifying and analyzing cryptocurrency manipulations
in social media. IEEE Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. 2021, 8, 607–617. [CrossRef]
61.
Chen, W.; Xu, Y.; Zheng, Z.; Zhou, Y.; Yang, J.E.; Bian, J. Detecting Pump & Dump Schemes on cryptocurrency market using an
improved Apriori Algorithm. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Service-Oriented System Engineering
(SOSE), San Francisco, CA, USA, 4–9 April 2019; pp. 293–2935.
62.
Yuan, Q.; Huang, B.; Zhang, J.; Wu, J.; Zhang, H.; Zhang, X. Detecting phishing scams on ethereum based on transaction records.
In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Sevilla, Spain, 10–21 October 2020;
pp. 1–5.
63.
Zhang, Y.; Yu, W.; Li, Z.; Raza, S.; Cao, H. Detecting ethereum Ponzi schemes based on improved LightGBM algorithm. IEEE
Trans. Comput. Soc. Syst. 2021, 9, 624–637. [CrossRef]
64.
Kumar, N.; Singh, A.; Handa, A.; Shukla, S.K. Detecting malicious accounts on the Ethereum blockchain with supervised learning.
In Proceedings of the International Symposium on Cyber Security Cryptography and Machine Learning, Be’er Sheva, Israel, 2–3
July 2020; pp. 94–109.
65.
Fan, S.; Fu, S.; Luo, Y.; Xu, H.; Zhang, X.; Xu, M. Smart Contract Scams Detection with Topological Data Analysis on Account
Interaction. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, Atlanta, GA,
USA, 17–21 October 2022; pp. 468–477.
66.
Nizzoli, L.; Tardelli, S.; Avvenuti, M.; Cresci, S.; Tesconi, M.; Ferrara, E. Charting the landscape of online cryptocurrency
manipulation. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 113230–113245. [CrossRef]
67.
Phillips, R.; Wilder, H. Tracing cryptocurrency scams: Clustering replicated advance-fee and phishing websites. In Proceedings of
the 2020 IEEE International Conference on Blockchain and Cryptocurrency (ICBC), Toronto, ON, Canada, 2–6 May 2020; pp. 1–8.
68.
Wu, J.; Yuan, Q.; Lin, D.; You, W.; Chen, W.; Chen, C.; Zheng, Z. Who are the phishers? phishing scam detection on ethereum via
network embedding. IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. Syst. 2020, 52, 1156–1166. [CrossRef]
69.
Lorenz, J.; Silva, M.I.; Aparício, D.; Ascensão, J.T.; Bizarro, P. Machine learning methods to detect money laundering in the Bitcoin
blockchain in the presence of label scarcity. In Proceedings of the First ACM International Conference on AI in Finance, New
York, NY, USA, 15–16 October 2020; pp. 1–8.
70.
Badawi, A.; Al-Haija, Q.A. Detection of money laundering in Bitcoin transactions. In Proceedings of the 4th Smart Cities
Symposium (SCS 2021), Online, 21–23 November 2021; pp. 458–464.
71.
Baek, H.; Oh, J.; Kim, C.Y.; Lee, K. A model for detecting cryptocurrency transactions with discernible purpose. In Proceedings
of the 2019 Eleventh International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks (ICUFN), Zagreb, Croatia, 2–5 July 2019;
pp. 713–717.
72.
Wen, H.; Fang, J.; Wu, J.; Zheng, Z. Transaction-based hidden strategies against general phishing detection framework on
ethereum. In Proceedings of the 2021 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Daegu, Republic of Korea,
22–28 May 2021; pp. 1–5.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 20 ---

Information 2023, 14, 171
20 of 20
73.
Chen, W.; Guo, X.; Chen, Z.; Zheng, Z.; Lu, Y. Phishing Scam Detection on Ethereum: Towards Financial Security for Blockchain
Ecosystem. In Proceedings of the IJCAI, Yokohama, Japan, 11–17 July 2020; pp. 4506–4512.
74.
Ostapowicz, M.; ˙Zbikowski, K. Detecting fraudulent accounts on blockchain: A supervised approach. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Web Information Systems Engineering, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 20–24 October 2020; pp. 18–31.
75.
Toyoda, K.; Ohtsuki, T.; Mathiopoulos, P.T. Identiﬁcation of high yielding investment programs in Bitcoin via transactions pattern
analysis. In Proceedings of the GLOBECOM 2017—2017 IEEE Global Communications Conference, Singapore, 4–8 December
2017; pp. 1–6.
76.
CNBC. Crypto Scammers Took a Record $14 Billion in 2021, 6 January 2022. Available online: https://www.cnbc.com/2022/01/
06/crypto-scammers-took-a-record-14-billion-in-2021-chainalysis.html (accessed on 21 December 2022).
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
