--- Page 1 ---

Operational Due Diligence on 
Cryptocurrency and Digital 
Asset Funds
Jason Scharfman
KEY FINDINGS
n	 The rigor of operational due diligence on crypto investments and asset managers has 
increased as more institutional capital has migrated into the crypto space.
n	 Crypto asset managers increasingly are focused on developing more institutional oper­
ational infrastructures, particularly in areas such as custody for DeFi investments. 
n	 Investors increasingly combine investigative and operational due diligence processes 
when evaluating crypto asset managers.
ABSTRACT
This article analyzes three key trends that have emerged among institutional investors 
performing operational due diligence (ODD) on cryptocurrency and digital asset funds. The 
first trend is enhanced crypto-specific ODD specialization as compared to other alternative 
asset classes. The second trend is an institutional focus on crypto custody arrangements. 
The third trend is a rapid movement toward integrating ODD and investigative due diligence 
processes in the crypto space.
W
ith the continued bull market in the cryptocurrency space, there has been a 
marked transition from largely retail investors focused on the space toward 
more institutional interest in cryptocurrencies and digital assets. Much of 
this interest has come not only in the form of direct investments into cryptocurren­
cies and related digital assets themselves, but also through allocations to third-party 
external fund managers that invest in the crypto space. While there are well-estab­
lished procedures for operational due diligence on alternative investment managers 
such as hedge funds and private equity funds, as with any emerging asset class, 
cryptocurrency and digital asset funds present a unique set of asset-specific due 
diligence challenges. As more capital has flowed into the crypto space, institutional 
limited partners (LPs) increasingly are struggling to adapt both their investment and 
operational due diligence (ODD) procedures to the space. 
This article will focus on ODD trends that have emerged in the institutional LP 
ODD space for crypto and digital asset fund managers. These trends are
§ Enhanced crypto-specific ODD specialization as compared to other alternative 
asset classes
§ Focus on crypto custody arrangements 
§ Rapid combination of crypto fund manager investigative due diligence and 
ODD processes.
Jason Scharfman
is a managing partner at 
Corgentum Consulting in 
New York, NY.
scharfman@corgentum
.com
It is illegal to make unauthorized copies, forward to an unauthorized user, post electronically, or store on shared cloud or hard drive without Publisher permission.
, by guest on March 4, 2025 Copyright 2021 With Intelligence LLC. 
https://pm-research.com/content/iijaltinv/24/3
Downloaded from 


--- Tables Found ---
KEY FINDINGS
n The rigor of operational due diligence on crypto investments and asset managers has
increased as more institutional capital has migrated into the crypto space.
n Crypto asset managers increasingly are focused on developing more institutional oper-
ational infrastructures, particularly in areas such as custody for DeFi investments.
n Investors increasingly combine investigative and operational due diligence processes
when evaluating crypto asset managers.

ABSTRACT
This article analyzes three key trends that have emerged among institutional investors
performing operational due diligence (ODD) on cryptocurrency and digital asset funds. The
first trend is enhanced crypto-specific ODD specialization as compared to other alternative
asset classes. The second trend is an institutional focus on crypto custody arrangements.
The third trend is a rapid movement toward integrating ODD and investigative due diligence
processes in the crypto space.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 2 ---

The Journal of Alternative Investments  |  45
Due Diligence 2022
It should be noted that these trends cover the entire crypto and digital asset 
fund manager space and are not necessarily specific to a certain strategy such as 
decentralized finance (DeFi) or large coin market-capitalization strategies. Prior to 
continuing with our analysis of these trends in more detail, it will first be useful to 
provide a historical context on how the current state of institutional LP ODD came 
about as well as to clarify select relevant terminology.
BACKGROUND
What Is Cryptocurrency Fund Operational Risk?
One of the most established definitions states that operational risk is the risk 
of loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, people, or systems, 
or from external events (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 2011). The term 
business risk is also sometimes utilized to refer to operational risk. In the world of 
alternative investments, operational risk has turned into a broad catch-all category for 
LPs to bucket all other risks that do not directly relate to the investment function of a 
fund. It should be noted that in practice, there is an overlap between the analysis of 
operational risk and investment areas of a fund manager. However, this classification 
of risks into investment and operational buckets is still useful in order to guide an 
LP’s review toward the framework by which certain risks are analyzed. In the crypto 
space, this same broad operational risk definitional framework is applied much the 
same way as it is in the alternative investment space. 
What Is the Difference between Crypto Operational Due Diligence 
and Operational Risk?
In the crypto space and the broader alternative investment context, operational 
due diligence refers to the process by which operational risk is analyzed. Operational 
due diligence is employed by LPs prior to an investment allocation (i.e., pre-investment 
ODD) and then on an ongoing basis to monitor operational risks in the crypto funds 
to which they had previously allocated. 
REASONS FOR INCREASED FOCUS BY CRYPTO LIMITED PARTNER 
OPERATIONAL DUE DILIGENCE
In recent years, LPs have devoted more resources toward the operational due 
diligence process, and this trend has continued into the crypto space. Unfortunately, 
very similar to the hedge fund space, a key reason for this has been a series of out­
right frauds. Although many of the crypto frauds may not have been as large scale 
or as brazen as the Madoff fraud, the Bayou Hedge Fund Group fraud, or the Gal­
leon insider trading case, the crypto hacks and frauds still have caused significant 
concerns for investors. Some of the more notable crypto frauds include the more 
than $460 million stolen from Tokyo-based bitcoin exchange Mt. Gox in 2014 and 
the $500 million hack of Japanese firm Coincheck in 2018. There also has been a 
continued series of lower-profile cases that continues to remind investors to focus 
on operational due diligence.
Another reason for LPs’ increased operational due diligence efforts includes 
the pervasive skepticism surrounding the security and reputation of crypto-related 
investments. Many of these concerns are rooted in the traditional black cloud that 
has hung over the crypto space, where crypto assets such as Bitcoin are perceived 
It is illegal to make unauthorized copies, forward to an unauthorized user, post electronically, or store on shared cloud or hard drive without Publisher permission.
, by guest on March 4, 2025 Copyright 2021 With Intelligence LLC. 
https://pm-research.com/content/iijaltinv/24/3
Downloaded from 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 3 ---

46  |  Operational Due Diligence on Cryptocurrency and Digital Asset Funds
Due Diligence 2022
to be primarily utilized by criminals on dark web portals such as Silk Road to conduct 
criminal activity. Recent studies have shown that these associations continue to 
overrepresent the illegal ways in which cryptocurrencies are utilized (Lennon 2021). 
For example, a series of studies conducted by Chainalysis showed that in 2019 
criminal activity represented only 2.1% of all cryptocurrency transaction volume or 
approximately $21.4 billion. In 2021, a revised Chainalysis study (Chainalysis 2021) 
showed that this number has continued to decrease, with the criminal share of all 
cryptocurrency activity falling to only 0.34% or approximately $10 billion in transaction 
volume. 
An additional contributing factor toward the continued association between cryp­
tocurrencies and criminal activity involves crypto in ransomware payments. Ransom­
ware attacks are common cybersecurity attacks where criminals install software on a 
computer or network that locks the legitimate users out of the system until a ransom 
is paid. Due to their need for speed and anonymity, criminals increasingly require pay­
ment in cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin for their ransom. A May 2021 ransomware 
attack by the criminal organization the DarkSide group on Colonial Pipeline caused 
damage to America’s supply of gas and resulted in the payment of nearly $5 million 
in cryptocurrency to the group to unlock the compromised systems (Sigalos 2021). 
These types of attacks have continued to reinforce concern among regulators and 
LPs about allocating to crypto hedge funds. 
Even before the Colonial Pipeline attack, in 2020, the US Treasury Department, 
in conjunction with the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN), proposed 
enhanced rules requiring banks, exchanges, and others dealing in cryptocurrencies to 
undertake enhanced processes compliance measures. Proposed regulations require 
these entities to focus on better verifying the identities of individuals attempting to 
withdraw or resend cryptocurrencies, with a particular focus on unhosted wallets. 
Unhosted wallets are held by individuals outside of the financial system. As unhosted 
wallets are unaccountable and unreportable to any exchange or broker with KYC/
AML controls, they are more likely to be used to conceal tax liability or illicit activity. 
This type of evolving regulatory uncertainty, coupled with the increased ransomware 
attacks to a level quadruple that of 2019, has continued to motivate LPs that seek 
to allocate to the crypto space to devote more resources toward their crypto ODD 
procedures (Light 2021). 
ENHANCED CRYPTO-SPECIFIC ODD SPECIALIZATION AS COMPARED 
TO OTHER ALTERNATIVE ASSET CLASSES
The crypto space evolves rapidly. Although the market continues to be dominated 
by well-established blockchains such as Bitcoin and Ethereum, there is a constant 
stream of new crypto-related projects and associated new coin offerings. Recently 
there has also been a large growth in digital art and non-fungible tokens, stable­
coins, and DeFi related projects. As a result, institutional LPs have had to markedly 
increase the specialization of their ODD procedures to more appropriately vet crypto 
and digital asset–related risks.
A survey of operational due diligence analysts conducted by Corgentum Consult­
ing in May 2021 (Corgentum Consulting 2021) found they are increasingly creating 
crypto-specific ODD policies and procedures. Specifically, 84% of those surveyed 
stated they had developed new due diligence questionnaires for crypto fund manag­
ers being evaluated, to better address the unique operational challenges presented 
by crypto investing. Furthermore, 73% of those surveyed said they were struggling to 
determine what constituted best practices, particularly in the areas of operations and 
It is illegal to make unauthorized copies, forward to an unauthorized user, post electronically, or store on shared cloud or hard drive without Publisher permission.
, by guest on March 4, 2025 Copyright 2021 With Intelligence LLC. 
https://pm-research.com/content/iijaltinv/24/3
Downloaded from 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 4 ---

The Journal of Alternative Investments  |  47
Due Diligence 2022
compliance, in the crypto space. A large contributor to this challenge, noted the ODD 
analysts surveyed, is the large deviation from traditional institutional level practices 
that hedge funds employ in key operational areas such as custody and valuation.
FOCUS ON CRYPTO CUSTODY ARRANGEMENTS 
One key area to which institutional LPs have devoted enhanced ODD resources is 
crypto custody. Custody refers to the process by which crypto assets are stored in a 
secure and documentable manner. In the early days of the crypto space, largely due 
to the belief that crypto investments should support the decentralization of financial 
services, many crypto investors held self-custody of assets in cold wallets, such as 
on their personal computers or portable hard-drive type wallets. This is obviously not 
the most secure solution because an individual’s home computer is subject to failure 
or hacking. Additionally, cold storage wallets may be lost or stolen. Finally, a user 
can simply forget the password to the wallet. That issue led to the development of 
pneumonic seed phrases that can help users remember their passwords, but this is 
not a foolproof system. For all these reasons, institutional investors are increasingly 
skeptical of self-custody solutions. 
One alternative to self-custody for a crypto fund manager is a hybrid solution 
sometimes referred to as a wallet plus solution, which uses hardware wallets with 
additional security measures layered on top. These other security measures might be 
two-factor authentication protocols or a requirement for multiple signatories, admin­
istered by a third party, before transactions occur in the wallet. 
The third custody model that crypto fund managers can employ is an entirely 
third-party custody solution. Third-party custody models are well established for alter­
native investment vehicles such as non-crypto hedge funds and private equity funds. 
Hedge funds that are increasingly investing in the crypto space through coins such 
as Litecoin, Ether, and Bitcoin also have embraced the traditional third-party custody 
model for crypto assets, with more than 52% of crypto hedge funds employing a third-
party custodian as of 2019. Anecdotal evidence suggests this number has steadily 
increased as more institutional LPs have focused on crypto asset custody during the 
ODD process (PwC 2019). 
Implementing third-party custody solutions has been made easier by the linked 
custody solutions being offered by crypto exchanges such as CoinBase and Gemini. 
These exchanges already offer institutional LPs internet-connected hot wallet options 
that allow crypto funds to store their coins in wallets hosted by the exchange instead 
of in purely cold wallet storage options. Third-party custodian models meet the more 
traditional established standards of non-crypto hedge fund and private equity insti­
tutional level custody. Due to the enhanced risks of hacks allowing for the virtu­
ally anonymous stealing of crypto assets once they are transferred to new wallets, 
crypto third-party custody solutions increasingly are mirroring the security mea­
sures employed by offsite business continuity and disaster recovery sites utilized by 
hedge funds.
These hardened facilities where physical keys to the assets of crypto fund man­
agers are kept often include military-grade security and biometric scans and highly 
specialized security devices such as hardware security modules (HSMs), the most 
secure of which are subject to Federal Information Processing Standard (FIPS) security 
ratings (Gemini 2019).
Increasingly, institutional LPs are analyzing whether a crypto fund manager is 
employing purely third-party custody or some other hybrid solution, and they are 
going a step further to evaluate the quality of the custody solutions and third-party 
It is illegal to make unauthorized copies, forward to an unauthorized user, post electronically, or store on shared cloud or hard drive without Publisher permission.
, by guest on March 4, 2025 Copyright 2021 With Intelligence LLC. 
https://pm-research.com/content/iijaltinv/24/3
Downloaded from 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 5 ---

48  |  Operational Due Diligence on Cryptocurrency and Digital Asset Funds
Due Diligence 2022
custodians employed. This type of advanced analysis represents a notable change 
in the depth of operational analysis being performed by these LPs. As more institu­
tional capital has flowed into the crypto space, many institutional LPs no longer are 
playing catch up to grasp the basic tenants of crypto custody; many have been able 
to elevate their analysis to apply more traditional types of deeper analysis. Common 
questions asked by LPs to evaluate the quality of the third-party custodians being 
utilized include the following:
§ What are the third-party custodian’s business continuity and disaster recovery 
plans?
§ Does the third-party custodian maintain any insurance in the event of a hack 
or other unauthorized transfer of crypto assets?
§ How does the third-party custodian approach the staking of crypto assets 
from a custody perspective?
§ How will the third-party custodian approach the custody of newly issued coins 
for which pre-existing custody solutions may not exist?
§ Can the third-party custodian provide auditable paper trails of all transactions 
into and out of the fund’s wallets?
To be clear, some crypto fund managers in spaces such as DeFi may still employ 
quasi self-custody solutions due to a lack of support for newer or evolving DeFi 
projects and related coins. In these types of situations, operational due diligence 
becomes increasingly important. First, the current custody solution employed by the 
crypto fund manager is analyzed, and the risk level is diagnosed. Then the institutional 
LP can consult with the crypto GP to determine if any alternative custody arrangements 
are available, which would facilitate the fund manager’s investment process while 
minimizing the LP’s operational risk exposure in the area of custody risk. 
TREND OF COMBINING OPERATIONAL AND INVESTIGATIVE DUE 
DILIGENCE CATEGORIES
Investigative due diligence, also called a background investigation, is the process 
of verifying and analyzing the background details and reputation related to the individ­
uals involved in managing the crypto fund. The five core areas covered by investigative 
due diligence, as described by Corgentum (2021), are
§ Criminal checks
§ Litigation searches
§ Regulatory research
§ Factual information review and confirmation (i.e., previous employment, 
educational background)
§ News and social media reviews
Historically, many LPs had outsourced the investigative process to a third-party 
firm that focused only on background investigations, coming from a hedge fund and 
private equity context. In recent years, a trend that has emerged throughout the 
alternative investment industry is for LPs to integrate the background investigation 
process with operational due diligence. A key driver for this trend is that in many 
cases, increased familiarity with more common reputation and background issues 
often can help provide a benchmark by which LPs can better compare findings. 
This trend also has taken hold in the crypto space,  arguably at a faster adoption 
rate than the speed at which this combined model was adopted in other segments of 
It is illegal to make unauthorized copies, forward to an unauthorized user, post electronically, or store on shared cloud or hard drive without Publisher permission.
, by guest on March 4, 2025 Copyright 2021 With Intelligence LLC. 
https://pm-research.com/content/iijaltinv/24/3
Downloaded from 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 6 ---

The Journal of Alternative Investments  |  49
Due Diligence 2022
the alternative investment space. A key reason for this is because of the aforemen­
tioned and often misplaced criminal associations linked to the use of cryptocurrencies 
and, by association, those that allocate capital in the space. This, combined with 
increased regulatory uncertainty in the crypto space, has caused more institutional 
LPs to take rapid measures to adjust their ODD process to integrate investigative 
due diligence and also to enhance the scope and depth of their investigative efforts. 
These investigations include reviews of key individuals of the crypto fund general 
partners, such as the chief investment officer, chief operating officer, key portfolio 
management personnel, and of fund management entities. 
This enhanced investigative and operational work takes place in other crypto-
related investments as well. When a private equity firm makes a direct ownership 
investment in a decentralized crypto exchange (DEX), for example, the private equity 
GP likely would perform deal-level operational due diligence and investigative due 
diligence on the DEX and associated key personnel. From an LP’s perspective, when 
seeking to allocate capital to the private equity firm that made the DEX investment, 
many LPs increasingly have modified their due diligence efforts under this new com­
bined model to look through the private equity GP to the underlying DEX investment. 
This enhanced level of due diligence may result in the LP performing its own back­
ground checks on key DEX personnel and entities, as well as evaluating the rigor of the 
DEX’s operations and compliance infrastructure, particularly in the area of anti-money 
laundering (AML) compliance. By combining the ODD and investigative due diligence 
procedures, LPs in the crypto space are finding they are better suited to evaluate 
the often enhanced operational complexities and reputational risks associated with 
investing in the crypto space. 
CONCLUSION 
As institutional capital has continued to flow into the crypto space, traditional 
approaches toward due diligence increasingly have had to adapt to meet the new 
operational, compliance, and regulatory challenges. Three key trends have emerged 
in the operational due diligence procedures employed by investors allocating to crypto 
and digital asset hedge funds in the space. The first trend is the enhanced crypto 
asset-specific specialization that institutional LPs have undertaken. This trend has 
taken hold because of the quickly evolving nature of the crypto space and the unique 
operational and compliance challenges presented by crypto assets. 
The second trend has involved a specific focus by institutional LPs during ODD 
on crypto custody arrangements. As the focus on this area has increased, crypto 
custody due diligence has continued to evolve beyond allowing LPs to develop a basic 
understanding of the crypto custody space toward conducting more-sophisticated 
analyses of the counterparty risk and quality of third-party crypto custody providers. 
The third trend that has developed, largely due to the continued associations of 
the crypto space with criminal activity and regulatory uncertainty, is the rapid accep­
tance of due diligence models that combine investigative due diligence and ODD 
processes for crypto-related investments. 
As institutional investors continue to embrace crypto-related investments, insti­
tutional LPs likely will continue to evolve and refine their operational due diligence 
procedures to adapt to the evolving series of cryptocurrency operational risks. These 
evolving ODD practices will also benefit from enhanced regulatory clarity toward the 
oversight of crypto assets, such as the forthcoming pan-European regulation called 
the Markets in Crypto-Assets Regulation (MiCAR). These regulations will provide a 
clearer roadmap that gives institutional investors more confidence in the regulatory 
oversight of the crypto space—and likely will serve to support the existing institutional 
ODD frameworks that have evolved in the area. 
It is illegal to make unauthorized copies, forward to an unauthorized user, post electronically, or store on shared cloud or hard drive without Publisher permission.
, by guest on March 4, 2025 Copyright 2021 With Intelligence LLC. 
https://pm-research.com/content/iijaltinv/24/3
Downloaded from 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 7 ---

50  |  Operational Due Diligence on Cryptocurrency and Digital Asset Funds
Due Diligence 2022
REFERENCES
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 2011. “Principles for the Sound Management of Opera­
tional Risk.” June. Available at: Principles for the Sound Management of Operational Risk (bis.org).
Chainalysis. 2021. “Crypto Crime Summarized: Scams and Darknet Markets Dominated 2020 by 
Revenue, but Ransomware Is the Bigger Story.” January 19. Available at: Chainalysis Blog | Crypto 
Crime Summarized: Scams and Darknet Markets Dominated 2020 by Revenue, But Ransomware 
Is the Bigger Story.
Corgentum Consulting. 2021. “Investigative Due Diligence/Background Checks.” Available at: 
Cloud Level (com.services).
Gemini. 2019. “A Guide to Crypto Custody.” Available at: guide-to-crypto-custody.pdf (gemini.com).
Lennon, H. 2021. “The False Narrative of Bitcoin’s Role In Illicit Activity.” Forbes, January 19. 
Available at: The False Narrative Of Bitcoin’s Role In Illicit Activity (forbes.com).
Light, J. 2021. “Crypto’s Anonymity Has Regulators Circling after the Colonial Pipeline Hack.” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, May 12. Available at Crypto’s Anonymity Has Regulators Circling After 
the Colonial Pipeline Hack – MCC.EXCHANGE.
PwC. 2019. “Crypto Hedge Fund Report.” Available at: pwc-elwood-2019-annual-crypto-hedge-
fund-report.pdf.
Sigalos, M. 2021. “Colonial Pipeline Cyberattack Is No Cause For Panic – Here’s Why.” CNBC, 
May 14. Available at: Colonial Pipeline cyberattack is no cause for panic – here’s why (msn.com).
It is illegal to make unauthorized copies, forward to an unauthorized user, post electronically, or store on shared cloud or hard drive without Publisher permission.
, by guest on March 4, 2025 Copyright 2021 With Intelligence LLC. 
https://pm-research.com/content/iijaltinv/24/3
Downloaded from 


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
