--- Page 1 ---

Blockchain & Cryptocurrency 
Regulation 
2019
Contributing Editor
Josias Dewey
First Edition
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 2 ---

GLI – Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Regulation 2019, First Edition
90
 www.globallegalinsights.com
© Published and reproduced with kind permission by Global Legal Group Ltd, London
Cryptocurrency and other 
digital assets for asset managers
Gregory S. Rowland & Trevor I. Kiviat
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Introduction
In 2008, an unknown author publishing under the name Satoshi Nakamoto released a white 
paper describing Bitcoin, a peer-to-peer version of electronic cash, and the corresponding 
software that facilitates online payments directly between counterparties without the need 
for a ﬁ nancial intermediary.  In the decade that has followed, Bitcoin and countless other 
open-source, decentralised protocols inspired by Bitcoin (for example, Ethereum and 
Monero) have come to represent a $300 billion-plus market of alternative assets, commonly 
referred to as “digital assets”, which are typically traded over the internet using online 
exchange platforms.  
Digital assets can serve several functions.  Although the following categories are not 
independent legal categories under U.S. law, such distinctions are helpful for understanding 
and crafting various investment strategies involving these assets.  Some digital assets, such 
as Bitcoin or Litecoin, are widely regarded as decentralised stores of value or mediums of 
exchange due to certain common economic features that support these functions; these are 
sometimes referred to as “pure cryptocurrencies”.  Other digital assets, such as Monero or 
Zcash, are a subset of pure cryptocurrencies that also possess certain features designed to 
enhance transaction privacy and conﬁ dentiality (“privacy-focused coins”).  
Beyond pure cryptocurrencies and privacy-focused coins, there exists a broad array of 
general purpose digital assets (“platform coins”), such as Ethereum, NEO and Ravencoin, 
which are designed to facilitate various peer-to-peer activity, from decentralised software 
applications to “smart” contracts to digital collectibles, such as CryptoKitties.  Platform 
coins also enable the creation of new digital assets called “tokens”, which are typically 
developed for a speciﬁ c purpose or application – for example, (1) “utility tokens”, which 
generally are designed to have some consumptive utility within a broader platform or 
service, or (2) “security tokens”, which are designed to represent more traditional interests 
like equity, debt and real estate with the added beneﬁ t of certain features of the digital asset 
markets, such as 24/7 operations, fractional ownership and rapid settlement.
The digital asset market extends beyond the assets themselves.  Other participants, including 
online exchanges, payment processors and mining companies, compose the broader digital 
asset industry.  And as this industry continues to grow, it has captured the attention of retail 
and institutional investors alike, including asset managers seeking to develop investment 
strategies and products involving these emerging assets and companies.  Some strategies 
resemble early-stage growth strategies, featuring long-term investments either directly in 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 3 ---

GLI – Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Regulation 2019, First Edition
91
 www.globallegalinsights.com
© Published and reproduced with kind permission by Global Legal Group Ltd, London
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Cryptocurrency and other digital assets for asset managers
certain digital assets or in start-up ventures developing complementary goods and services 
for the industry.  Other strategies include hedge fund strategies, such as long/short funds, 
which often use derivatives, or arbitrage strategies, which seek to capitalise on the price 
fragmentation across the hundreds of global online exchanges.
This chapter outlines the current U.S. regulatory framework applicable to cryptocurrency 
and other digital asset investment funds (“digital asset funds”) offered to U.S. investors 
and how those regulatory considerations affect fund structuring decisions.
The U.S. regulatory framework generally
Digital asset funds operated in the United States or offered to U.S. investors must contend and 
comply with a complex array of statutes and regulations.  These include the Securities Act of 
1933 (the “Securities Act”), which regulates the offer and sale of securities; the Investment 
Company Act of 1940 (the “1940 Act”), which regulates pooled investment vehicles that 
invest in securities; the Commodity Exchange Act (the “CEA”), which regulates funds and 
advisers that trade in futures contracts, options on futures contracts, commodity options 
and swaps; and the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (the “Advisers Act”), which governs 
investment advisers to such funds.  Additionally, many fund-structuring decisions are driven 
by tax considerations.  This section sets out the current U.S. regulatory framework applicable 
to digital asset funds managed in the United States or offered to U.S. investors and explores 
how those regulatory considerations affect fund structuring decisions.
Offering of fund interests
Interests in investment funds are securities.  Under the Securities Act, an offering of 
securities must be registered with the SEC or made pursuant to an exemption.  While there 
are a few possible exemptions, the most common exemption that private funds rely upon is 
Regulation D, which provides two alternative exemptions from registration: Rule 504 and 
Rule 506.  Because most private investment funds intend to raise more than $5 million, Rule 
506, which provides no limit on the amount of securities that may be sold or offered, is the 
exemption under Regulation D most commonly relied on by such funds, and consequently, 
this discussion of Regulation D is limited to offerings made under Rule 506.1  In order to 
offer or sell securities in reliance on Rule 506 of Regulation D, an investment fund must:
• 
limit sales of its securities to no more than 35 non-accredited investors (unless the 
offering is made pursuant to Rule 506(c), in which case all purchasers must be 
accredited investors), although securities may be sold to an unlimited number of 
accredited investors;
• 
ensure that all non-accredited investors meet a sophistication requirement by having 
such knowledge and experience in ﬁnancial and business matters that they are capable 
of evaluating the merits and risks of the prospective investment; 
• 
refrain from general solicitation or advertising in offering or selling securities (unless 
the offering is made pursuant to Rule 506(c));
• 
comply with the information disclosure requirements of Rule 502(b) with respect to any 
offering to non-accredited investors.  There are no speciﬁc information requirements 
for offerings to accredited investors;
• 
implement offering restrictions to prevent resales of any securities sold in reliance on 
Regulation D; and
• 
ﬁle a Form D notice of the offering with the SEC within 15 calendar days of the ﬁrst 
sale of securities pursuant to Regulation D.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 4 ---

GLI – Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Regulation 2019, First Edition
92
 www.globallegalinsights.com
© Published and reproduced with kind permission by Global Legal Group Ltd, London
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Cryptocurrency and other digital assets for asset managers
There are also some important limitations on the scope of the Regulation D exemption.  For 
example, Regulation D only exempts the initial transaction itself (i.e., resales of securities 
acquired in an offering made pursuant to Regulation D must be either registered or resold 
pursuant to another exemption from registration).  Furthermore, Regulation D is not 
available for any transaction or series of transactions that, while in technical compliance with 
Regulation D, is deemed to be part of “a plan or scheme to evade the registration provisions 
of the [Securities] Act”.
The regulatory treatment of cryptocurrencies and other digital assets
As discussed above, interests in investment funds themselves are securities; however, these 
funds may hold a variety of different assets in pursuing their respective strategies – from digital 
assets (e.g., Bitcoin and Ether) to derivatives instruments (e.g., Bitcoin futures contracts) to 
securities (e.g., equity in an emerging growth company or interests in another digital asset 
investment fund).  This section provides an overview of the regulatory treatment of such 
assets, particularly with respect to the deﬁ nitions of “securities” under the U.S. securities laws 
and “commodity interests” under the CEA, before explaining how these characterisations 
impact structuring decisions.  Although some generalisations may be inferred about the 
possible treatment of certain assets based on common features and fact patterns, there is no 
substitute for a careful case-by-case analysis of each asset, in close consultation with counsel.
In July 2017, in a release commonly referred to the DAO Report,2 the SEC determined 
that certain digital assets are securities for purposes of the U.S. federal securities laws. 
The DAO Report was published in response to a 2016 incident in which promoters of an 
unincorporated virtual organisation (“The DAO”) commenced an initial coin offering (an 
“ICO”), a term that generally refers to a sale of tokens to investors in order to fund the 
development of the platform or network in which such tokens will be used.  The DAO was 
created by a German company called Slock.it, and it was designed to allow holders of DAO 
tokens to vote on projects that The DAO would fund, with any proﬁ ts ﬂ owing to token-
holders.  Slock.it marketed The DAO as the ﬁ rst instance of a decentralised autonomous 
organisation, powered by smart contracts on a blockchain platform.  The DAO’s ICO raised 
approximately $150 million (USD) in Ether.
In the DAO Report, the SEC reasoned that The DAO tokens were unregistered securities 
because they were investment contracts, which is one type of security under the U.S. 
securities laws.  Though it declined to take enforcement action against The DAO, the SEC 
used this opportunity to warn others engaged in similar ICO activities that an unregistered 
sale of digital assets can, depending on the facts and circumstances, be an illegal public 
offering of securities.  The SEC has relied on similar reasoning in subsequent actions taken 
against token issuers that deem certain other digital assets sold in ICOs to be securities (such 
securities, “DAO-style tokens”).3  Many DAO-style tokens are branded by their promoters 
as utility tokens to convey the idea that such tokens are designed to have some consumptive 
utility within a broader platform or service.  But as noted above, this terminology does not 
have any legal consequence under the U.S. securities laws.  Instead, a proper inquiry must 
examine the facts and circumstances surrounding the asset’s offering and sale, including 
the economic realities of the transaction.4  Key factors to consider include: (1) whether a 
third party – be it a person, entity or coordinated group of actors – drives the expectation 
of a return; and (2) whether the digital asset, through contractual or other technical means, 
functions more like a consumer item and less like a security.5
In addition to DAO-style tokens, some digital assets are explicitly designed to be treated 
as securities from the outset and are meant to represent traditional interests like equity and 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 5 ---

GLI – Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Regulation 2019, First Edition
93
 www.globallegalinsights.com
© Published and reproduced with kind permission by Global Legal Group Ltd, London
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Cryptocurrency and other digital assets for asset managers
debt, with the added beneﬁ t of certain features of the digital asset markets, such as 24/7 
operations, fractional ownership and rapid settlement.  These digital assets are securities by 
deﬁ nition, and although they represent an innovation in terms of how securities trade, clear 
and settle, they are not necessarily a new asset class.
Any cryptocurrencies or other digital assets that are not deemed to be securities under 
the U.S. securities laws may be considered “commodities” under the CEA, due to the 
broad deﬁ nition of the term.6  For example, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
(“CFTC”) appears to be treating Bitcoin as an exempt commodity under the CEA, a 
category that includes metals and energy products,7 but does not include currencies or 
securities, which are classiﬁ ed as excluded commodities.8  In addition, the CFTC recently 
permitted the self-certiﬁ cation of futures contracts and binary options on Bitcoin by futures 
exchanges under its rules for listing ordinary futures contracts.9  And although the SEC 
has not taken any action with respect to Bitcoin speciﬁ cally, SEC Chairman Jay Clayton 
recently acknowledged, and appeared to accept as correct, the CFTC’s designation of 
Bitcoin as a commodity over which the CFTC has anti-fraud jurisdiction.10  Finally, to the 
extent that a digital asset is a commodity, any derivatives offered on that commodity – for 
example, Bitcoin futures contracts and binary options – fall squarely within the deﬁ nition 
of commodity interests under the CEA.
Possible obligations of the manager under the Advisers Act or the CEA
The question of whether a digital asset fund manager must comply with additional 
regulations under either, or both of, the Advisers Act and the CEA turns primarily on the 
characterisation of the assets its funds hold.  First, a manager is deemed an “investment 
adviser” under Section 202(a)(11) of the Advisers Act, and thus is subject to the rules and 
regulations thereunder, if it “for compensation, engages in the business of advising others, 
either directly or through publications or writings, as to the value of securities or as to 
the advisability of investing in, purchasing, or selling securities”, or “for compensation 
and as part of a regular business, issues or promulgates analyses or reports concerning 
securities”.  So to the extent that a manager of a cryptocurrency or other digital asset fund is 
advising on “securities” – for example, because its funds hold DAO-style tokens or security 
tokens – it must register as an investment advisor with the SEC unless such individual or 
entity qualiﬁes for an exclusion from the deﬁnition or an exemption from the registration 
requirement.11
Registration under the Advisers Act subjects advisers to a host of rules and regulations, 
including those governing advertising, custody, proxy voting, record keeping, the content 
of advisory contracts and fees.  For example, the Advisers Act custody rule12 (the “custody 
rule”) has detailed provisions applicable to any SEC-registered investment adviser deemed 
to have custody, as deﬁ ned under the rule.  Among other things, it requires use of a 
“qualiﬁ ed custodian” to hold client funds or securities, notices to clients detailing how their 
assets are being held, account statements for clients detailing their holdings, annual surprise 
examinations and additional protections when a related qualiﬁ ed custodian is used.  For 
example, investment advisers dealing in digital assets may need to consider whether a bank, 
registered broker-dealer, or other ﬁ rm that meets the deﬁ nition of a qualiﬁ ed custodian, is 
willing to take custody of the digital assets.
Second, managers of private funds that invest or trade in “commodity interests”, whether 
as an integral part of their investment strategy or only in a limited capacity, for hedging 
purposes or otherwise, are subject to regulation under the CEA and the rules of the 
CFTC thereunder (“CFTC Rules”).  Commodity interests generally include: (1) futures 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 6 ---

GLI – Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Regulation 2019, First Edition
94
 www.globallegalinsights.com
© Published and reproduced with kind permission by Global Legal Group Ltd, London
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Cryptocurrency and other digital assets for asset managers
contracts and options on futures contracts; (2) swaps; (3) certain retail foreign currency and 
commodity transactions; and (4) commodity options and certain leveraged transactions. 
So to the extent that the activities of a manager of a cryptocurrency or other digital asset 
fund include trading in commodity interests – for example, because it holds Bitcoin futures 
contracts or binary options – it will be subject to registration and regulation as a commodity 
pool operator (“CPO”) or commodity trading advisor (“CTA”), unless it qualiﬁ es for an 
exemption or exclusion under the CEA or the CFTC Rules.
If the activities of an investment fund bring it within the deﬁ nition of a “commodity pool” 
under the CEA, the manager is required to register as a CPO with the CFTC, unless such 
person otherwise qualiﬁ es for an exclusion from the deﬁ nition of CPO or an exemption 
from the registration requirement.  The CEA also provides for the registration of CTAs, 
which is in some respects analogous to the treatment of investment advisers under the 
Advisers Act.  It should be noted, however, that numerous requirements under the CEA and 
the CFTC Rules apply to all CPOs and CTAs, even those that are exempt from registration.
Possible obligations of the fund under the 1940 Act or CEA
Similarly, the fund itself may be subject to additional regulations under either, or both of, the 
1940 Act and the CEA, an analysis that, again, turns primarily on the assets the fund holds. 
An investment company is deﬁned under Section 3(a)(1)(A) of the 1940 Act as any issuer 
that “is or holds itself out as being engaged primarily, or proposes to engage primarily, in 
the business of investing, reinvesting or trading in securities”.  This subjective test is based 
generally on how a company holds itself out to the public and the manner in which it 
pursues its business goals, and is designed to capture traditional investment companies that 
are deliberately acting in that capacity.  Additionally, Section 3(a)(1)(C) of the 1940 Act sets 
forth an objective, numerical test that applies to companies that hold a signiﬁcant portion of 
their assets in investment securities, even if they do not hold themselves out as traditional 
investment companies. 
Companies that fall within one of these deﬁnitions of an investment company must either 
satisfy an exemption from the 1940 Act or register under it.  The 1940 Act is a comprehensive 
statutory regime that imposes strict requirements on registered investment companies’ 
governance, leverage, capital structure and operations.  Consequently, most private equity 
funds, hedge funds and other alternative investment vehicles, which fall squarely within the 
deﬁnition of “investment company,” are structured to satisfy an exemption from the 1940 
Act.
The 1940 Act provides speciﬁc exemptions from the deﬁnition of “investment company” 
for privately offered investment funds and certain other types of companies.  For example, 
Section 3(c)(1) exempts a private investment fund from registration if the outstanding 
securities of such fund (other than short-term paper) are beneﬁ cially owned by not more 
than 100 persons and such fund does not presently propose to make a public offering of its 
securities.  Further, Section 3(c)(7) excludes an entity from registration as an investment 
company if all of the beneﬁ cial owners of its outstanding securities are “qualiﬁ ed purchasers” 
and the entity does not make or propose to make a public offering of its securities, and it 
does not limit the number of beneﬁ cial owners.
The CEA deﬁ nes “commodity pool” as any investment trust, syndicate or similar form of 
enterprise operated for the purpose of trading in commodity interests.  The CFTC interprets 
“for the purpose” broadly and has rejected suggestions that trading commodity interests 
must be a vehicle’s principal or primary purpose.  As a result, any trading by a private fund 
in swaps, futures contracts or other commodity interests, no matter how limited in scope, 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 7 ---

GLI – Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Regulation 2019, First Edition
95
 www.globallegalinsights.com
© Published and reproduced with kind permission by Global Legal Group Ltd, London
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Cryptocurrency and other digital assets for asset managers
and regardless of whether undertaken for hedging or speculative purposes, generally will 
bring a private fund within the commodity pool deﬁ nition.
According to the CFTC, a fund that does not trade commodity interests directly but invests 
in another fund that trades commodity interests would itself be a commodity pool.  Thus, 
in a master-feeder fund structure, a feeder fund will be considered a commodity pool if the 
master fund is a commodity pool.  Similarly, a fund of funds that invests in commodity 
pools may itself be considered a commodity pool.
Finally, an investment vehicle can be both an “investment company” under the 1940 Act and 
a “commodity pool” under the CEA, and an exception from the registration requirements 
of the 1940 Act does not generally imply an exception from CPO registration under the 
Commodity Exchange Act (or vice versa).  Similarly, an exception from registration under 
the Advisers Act does not generally imply an exception from CTA registration (or vice 
versa).  Furthermore, interests in commodity pools are “securities” under the Securities Act, 
and therefore the Securities Act applies to the offer and sale of interests in a commodity 
pool to the same extent as it applies to any other type of security.  Accordingly, offering of 
interests in a private fund that is a commodity pool generally will be structured to meet the 
requirements of a Securities Act exemption (e.g., Regulation D, as discussed above).
Applying this framework to digital asset funds
Given the regulatory mineﬁ eld laid out above, managers face a multitude of structuring 
decisions in conceiving and launching digital asset funds aimed at U.S. investors.  These 
decisions will often inﬂ uence, and be inﬂ uenced by, the manager’s investment strategy – 
particularly as it relates to the types of assets the fund should be permitted to hold.  This 
section explores some common structures and the strategies they support.  In each of these 
cases, one should keep in mind that interests in the digital asset fund itself are securities, as 
noted above, that must be offered and sold pursuant to an exemption, such as Regulation 
D, except in the case of registered (i.e., public) funds, which are offered and sold in fully-
registered securities offerings.
First, the manager may decide that the fund should have ﬂ exibility to invest in securities. 
It may want to invest in “traditional” securities like equity or debt in a company within 
the digital asset industry (including through tokenised securities), or DAO-style tokens 
and other digital assets at risk of being deemed investment contracts.  In this case, the 
adviser will likely need to register under the Advisers Act and comply with the host of rules 
and regulations thereunder, including those governing advertising, custody, proxy voting, 
record-keeping, the content of advisory contracts, and fees.  Non-U.S. advisers, however, 
can potentially rely on Advisers Act Rule 203(m)-1 (the “private fund adviser rule”).13  
Custody poses unique questions in the digital asset context, and it is not clear in all cases 
whether digital assets would be viewed as funds or securities, such that the custody rule 
would apply.  Currently, most qualiﬁ ed custodians do not offer custody services for digital 
assets.  In any case, the manager should familiarise itself with the operational considerations 
of digital asset custody.  First, what does it mean to have custody of an asset that is not 
physical and even in digital form, does not exist on a centralised database, but instead 
on one that is universal and distributed?  For example, one cannot physically move units 
of Bitcoin off of the Bitcoin blockchain and store them elsewhere.  However, in order to 
exercise control over one’s Bitcoins, one needs a private and a public key.  These keys are 
a series of hexadecimal characters (e.g., 1A1zP1eP5QGeﬁ 2DMPTfTL5SLmv7DivfNa), 
which must be stored carefully.  The public key is the identity of the address on the network 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 8 ---

GLI – Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Regulation 2019, First Edition
96
 www.globallegalinsights.com
© Published and reproduced with kind permission by Global Legal Group Ltd, London
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Cryptocurrency and other digital assets for asset managers
that has ownership and control of those Bitcoins  –  this key can be shared with anyone, 
and in fact, it must be shared in order to receive Bitcoins.  The private key is essentially 
a password, and Bitcoins can be transferred out of a particular address by anyone with 
possession of that address’s corresponding private key.  So in the case of a blockchain-
based asset like Bitcoin, control of the private key may be tantamount to custody.  As there 
is simply no recourse to retrieve Bitcoins when a private key is lost or stolen, a critical 
operational point for managers is safe and secure private key storage, for example through 
“deep cold” storage.14
If the manager believes the digital asset fund may invest in securities, the fund itself would 
likely be structured so as to meet one of the various registration exemptions for entities 
that would otherwise be classiﬁ ed as “investment companies” under the 1940 Act.15  For 
offshore funds, the requirements of Sections 3(c)(1) and 3(c)(7), which are discussed above, 
generally only apply to U.S. investors.
Alternatively, the manager may decide that the fund should be a registered investment 
company.  In fact, there have been a number of requests to list on national securities 
exchanges the shares of such funds.  The SEC has repeatedly denied such requests, and in 
January 2018, the SEC’s Division of Investment Management outlined several questions that 
sponsors would be expected to address before it would consider granting approval for funds 
holding “substantial amounts” of cryptocurrencies or “cryptocurrency-related products.”16 
The questions, which focus on speciﬁ c requirements of the 1940 Act, generally fall into 
one of ﬁ ve key areas: valuation, liquidity, custody, arbitrage and potential manipulation. 
And although such funds alternatively could potentially be offered to the public as non-
investment companies (to the extent they do not hold signiﬁ cant amounts of securities) under 
the Securities Act, the SEC has indicated that signiﬁ cant, similar questions exist there also.17
Second, the manager may decide that the fund should have ﬂ exibility to invest in commodity 
interests, such as futures contracts or binary options, either for hedging or speculative 
purposes.  Any such trading by a private fund, no matter how limited in scope, and regardless 
of the purpose, would generally make such fund a “commodity pool,” as discussed above.  In 
this case, the manager may be required to register as a CPO or CTA with the CFTC, although 
certain exemptions exist for non-U.S. managers and for funds that invest in only limited 
amounts of commodity interests.  Even if the manager decides that such fund should only 
invest in commodity interests and not securities, interests in commodity pools are “securities” 
under the Securities Act, and therefore, the fund would generally be structured to meet the 
requirements of a Securities Act exemption (e.g., Regulation D, as discussed above).
Finally, the manager may decide that the fund should hold neither securities nor commodity 
interests – in other words, a fund that holds only commodities, or “pure cryptocurrencies,” 
such as Bitcoin, and no commodity interests.  Because this category does not have 
independent legal signiﬁ cance under U.S. law, such determinations regarding the risk that 
a given digital asset could be deemed a “security” for U.S. securities laws purposes should 
be made carefully and together with legal counsel.  In this case, the fund would not be 
governed by the 1940 Act, and the manager’s activities with respect to the fund would 
not be governed by the Advisers Act, as both of these regimes are premised upon the fund 
holding securities, as discussed above.  Further, because the fund does not hold commodities 
interests, it would likely not be considered a “commodity pool”, and the manager would 
likely not be required to register as a CPO or CTA with the CFTC.  However, the fund 
and the manager in this case would not be entirely unregulated.  As noted above, interests 
in the fund are securities (regardless of the underlying assets that the fund invests in), the 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 9 ---

GLI – Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Regulation 2019, First Edition
97
 www.globallegalinsights.com
© Published and reproduced with kind permission by Global Legal Group Ltd, London
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Cryptocurrency and other digital assets for asset managers
offer and sale of which must comply with U.S. securities laws.  Additionally, the CFTC has 
some, albeit limited, jurisdiction over the spot market for commodities pursuant to its anti-
fraud and manipulation authority.18  Moreover, the manager of such a fund would likely be 
considered a common law ﬁ duciary to such a fund and thus subject to ﬁ duciary duties in its 
management of the fund.
While beyond the scope of this paper, many fund-structuring decisions are driven by U.S. 
federal income tax considerations.  For example, many private investment fund structures 
typically consist of at least two investment vehicles: a vehicle that is organised in the United 
States and is treated as a partnership for U.S. federal income tax purposes (the “Onshore 
Fund”); and a vehicle that is organised in a tax haven jurisdiction, such as the Cayman 
Islands or the British Virgin Islands, and is treated as a corporation for U.S. federal income 
tax purposes (the“Offshore Fund”).  U.S. taxable investors generally invest in the Onshore 
Fund.  Because of the transparency of partnerships for U.S. federal income tax purposes, the 
U.S. investors are generally treated as if they directly derived their shares of the Onshore 
Fund’s items of income, gains, losses, and deductions.  The Offshore Fund is a passive 
foreign investment company (“PFIC”), for U.S. federal income tax purposes.
Conclusion
Over the past decade, digital assets have come a long way – from Satoshi’s original Bitcoin 
white paper to today’s broad universe of 1,600-plus digital assets trading across hundreds 
of online trading platforms.  As this market and the surrounding industry matures, asset 
managers will likely continue to identify opportunities to either deploy novel investment 
strategies or adapt their tried-and-true strategies in this new context.  As set out above, 
such managers face a complex array of statutes and regulations in offering digital asset 
funds to U.S. investors.  These considerations, together with the investment strategies that 
the manager desires to pursue, affect fund structuring decisions, and accordingly, are best 
addressed together with counsel.
* * *
Endnotes
1. 
Historically, issuers and any persons acting on their behalf were prohibited from engaging 
in any form of general solicitation or general advertising in Rule 506 offerings.  However, 
in July 2013, the SEC adopted ﬁnal rules to permit general solicitation and general 
advertising in Rule 506 offerings under new Rule 506(c).  Additional requirements apply 
to Rule 506(c) offerings, including the requirement to take reasonable steps to verify an 
investor’s accredited investor status.  Under Rule 506(b), an investment fund may offer 
securities pursuant to Rule 506 without complying with these additional requirements if 
it does not use general solicitation.  Currently, most private funds offered in the United 
States choose not to use general solicitation. 
2. 
SEC Release No. 81207, Report of Investigation Pursuant to Section 21(a) of the 
Securities Exchange Act of 1934: The DAO (Jul. 25, 2017). 
3. 
See, e.g., SEC Release No. 10445, In the matter of Munchee, Inc. (Dec. 11, 2017). 
4. 
This includes, for example, (1) whether the investor’s fortunes are interwoven with 
those of other investors or the efforts of the promoter of the investment, and (2) whether 
the investor’s expectation of proﬁ ts are based predominantly upon the entrepreneurial 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 10 ---

GLI – Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Regulation 2019, First Edition
98
 www.globallegalinsights.com
© Published and reproduced with kind permission by Global Legal Group Ltd, London
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Cryptocurrency and other digital assets for asset managers
or managerial efforts of the promoter or other third parties.  See SEC v. W.J. Howey Co., 
328 U.S. 293, 301 (1946). 
5. 
Director William Hinman, Remarks at the Yahoo Finance All Markets Summit, Asset 
Transactions: When Howey Met Gary (Plastic) (Jun. 14, 2018), available at https://
www.sec.gov/news/speech/speech-hinman-061418.  Further, the speech indicates that 
a digital asset that was originally offered in a securities offering may later be sold in 
a manner that does not constitute an offering of a security, in limited circumstances, 
where: (i) there is no longer a central enterprise being invested in; and (ii) the asset is 
only being sold to end users who will purchase a good or service available through a 
network.  This also raises a counterfactual question – that is, whether a token network 
that was once decentralised could “centralise”, such that it would fall within the scope 
of the securities laws. 
6. 
See 7 U.S.C. § 1a(9). 
7. 
See 7 U.S.C. § 1a(20) (deﬁ ning exempt commodity to mean any commodity that is not 
an agricultural commodity or an excluded commodity; excluded commodity is deﬁ ned 
in Section 1a(19) of the CEA to include any “interest rate, exchange rate, currency, 
security, security index” and other ﬁ nancial rates and assets). 
8. 
See In re Coinﬂ ip, Inc., CFTC No. 15-29, 2015 WL 5535736 (Sept. 17, 2015).  In 
this order, the CFTC found that Coinﬂ ip’s Bitcoin options were offered in violation 
of CFTC regulation 32.2, which governs commodity option transactions.  The CFTC 
noted that the options “were not conducted pursuant to [CFTC] Regulation 32.3”, 
the so-called “trade option exemption”, which permits trading of commodity options 
on exempt and agricultural commodities, but not on excluded commodities such as 
securities, currencies, interest rates and ﬁ nancial indices.  The CFTC, in describing 
why the trade option exemption was not available for Coinﬂ ip’s options, focused 
on requirements under CFTC regulation that the options must be offered by eligible 
contract participants to commercial users of the underlying commodity, and not on the 
classiﬁ cation of Bitcoin as an excluded commodity. 
9. 
See CFTC Release pr7654-17, CFTC Statement on Self-Certiﬁ cation of Bitcoin 
Products by CME, CFE and Cantor Exchange (Dec. 1, 2017).  See also CFTC 
Backgrounder on Oversight of and Approach to Virtual Currency Futures Markets (Jan. 
4, 2018) (describing the CFTC’s authority with respect to virtual currency and the 
“heightened review” employed during the Bitcoin futures self-certiﬁ cation process). 
10. SEC Chairman Jay Clayton, Statement on Cryptocurrencies and Initial Coin Offerings, 
at n. 2 (Dec. 11, 2017) (“The CFTC has designated Bitcoin as a commodity.  Fraud and 
manipulation involving Bitcoin traded in interstate commerce are appropriately within 
the purview of the CFTC, as is the regulation of commodity futures tied directly to [B]
itcoin.”); see also CNBC, SEC Chief Says Agency Won’t Change Securities Laws to 
Cater to Cryptocurrencies (Jun. 6, 2018) (“‘Cryptocurrencies: These are replacements 
for sovereign currencies, replace the dollar, the euro, the yen with [B]itcoin,’ Clayton 
said. ‘That type of currency is not a security.’”). 
11. Investment advisers not registered with the SEC may be subject to registration with 
U.S. states. 
12. 17 U.S.C. § 206(4)-2. 
13. For an adviser that has its principal ofﬁce and place of business outside of the United 
States, an Advisers Act registration exemption is available under the private fund 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 11 ---

GLI – Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Regulation 2019, First Edition
99
 www.globallegalinsights.com
© Published and reproduced with kind permission by Global Legal Group Ltd, London
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Cryptocurrency and other digital assets for asset managers
adviser rule, so long as: (i) the adviser has no client that is a U.S. person (generally as 
deﬁned in Regulation S under the Securities Act) except for “qualifying private funds” 
(as deﬁ ned in the rule); and (ii) all assets managed by the adviser at a place of business 
in the United States are solely attributable to private fund assets with a value of less 
than $150 million.  Advisers relying on this exemption are still required to ﬁ le certain 
information with the SEC. 
14. Cold storage refers to the process of storing digital assets, such as bitcoins, ofﬂ ine 
(i.e., storing the private keys on a device not connected to the internet).  However, 
the private keys associated with this process may have been exposed to the internet at 
some time during the generation of the signing process.  Deep cold storage, however, 
is a type of cold storage where not only are the digital assets stored ofﬂ ine, but also 
the private keys associated with those assets are generated in ofﬂ ine systems, and the 
signing process of the transactions is also made in ofﬂ ine systems.  The systems used 
in this type of storage never touch the internet; they are created ofﬂ ine, they are stored 
ofﬂ ine, and they are ofﬂ ine when signing transactions. 
15. See 1940 Act § 3(c)(1)-(7). 
16. SEC, Staff Letter: Engaging on Fund Innovation and Cryptocurrency-related Holdings 
(Jan. 18, 2018), available at https://www.sec.gov/divisions/investment/noaction/2018/
cryptocurrency-011818.htm (the “Letter”). 
17. On March 23, 2018, the SEC issued an order instituting proceedings to determine 
whether it will approve a proposal by NYSE Arca to list two ProShares-sponsored 
Bitcoin futures-backed exchange-traded funds (“ETFs”).  On April 5, 2018, the SEC 
published a second order instituting proceedings relating to a rule-change proposal 
by Cboe BZX Exchange, Inc. that would allow for the listing of two GraniteShares-
sponsored ETFs that invest in Bitcoin futures contracts (both orders together, the 
“Orders”).  The Orders ask for comments on many of the same issues raised in the 
Letter and institute a new period of review for such products, including a request for 
public comment on 12 areas of interest.  These areas include concerns relating to: 
(1) such ETFs’ investment practices; (2) the underlying spot and futures markets for 
Bitcoin; and (3) how such markets may in turn affect ETFs that invest in Bitcoin futures. 
For example, the SEC requests comments on the ETFs’ valuation policies (e.g., how 
would such policies account for the possibility of a hard fork), including how such 
policies relate to the underlying Bitcoin spot markets, their potential for manipulation 
and what, if any, effect these factors could have on the ETFs’ net asset value.  On July 
26, 2018, the SEC issued an order disapproving a rule-change proposal by Bats BZX 
Exchange, Inc. that would have allowed for the listing of the Winklevoss Bitcoin Trust.
18. See CFTC Rule 180.1. 
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 12 ---

GLI – Blockchain & Cryptocurrency Regulation 2019, First Edition
100
 www.globallegalinsights.com
© Published and reproduced with kind permission by Global Legal Group Ltd, London
450 Lexington Avenue, New York, NY 10017, USA
Tel: +1 212 450 4000 / Fax: +1 212 701 5800 / URL: www.davispolk.com
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Cryptocurrency and other digital assets for asset managers
Davis Polk & Wardwell LLP
Trevor I. Kiviat
Tel: +1 212 450 3448 / Email: trevor.kiviat@davispolk.com
Trevor I. Kiviat is an associate in Davis Polk’s Investment Management 
Group.  His practice focuses on advising clients on the formation and 
operation of private investment funds, including private equity funds and 
hedge funds.  He also regularly provides regulatory and compliance advice to 
his private fund clients.
In addition, Mr Kiviat wrote the ﬁ rst widely read and cited academic paper 
distinguishing Bitcoin from blockchain technology.  He has been cited in 
the media as an expert on blockchain technology and digital assets and has 
lectured on related topics at Duke University’s law school and business 
school.  He advises clients on the novel strategic, operational and regulatory 
issues relating to digital asset-based businesses. 
Gregory S. Rowland
Tel: +1 212 450 4930 / Email: gregory.rowland@davispolk.com
Gregory S. Rowland is a partner in Davis Polk’s Corporate Department, 
practising in the Investment Management Group.  He focuses on providing 
transactional, regulatory and compliance advice relating to investment 
advisers, mutual funds, closed-end funds, business development companies, 
private equity funds and hedge funds.  He devotes a large portion of his 
practice to the structuring, launch and operation of registered investment 
companies and hedge funds and to the sales, acquisitions and restructurings of 
asset management ﬁ rms.
Mr Rowland advises ﬁ nancial institutions, technology companies and asset 
managers in connection with transactional, regulatory and compliance issues 
concerning digital currency and blockchain activities, including digital currency 
fund formation.  In addition, he advises ﬁ nancial institutions, fund sponsors, 
corporations, employees’ securities companies, and other entities regarding 
exemptions under the Investment Company Act and Investment Advisers Act.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 13 ---

Other titles in the Global Legal Insights series include:
• Banking Regulation
• Bribery & Corruption
• Cartels
• Corporate Tax
• Employment & Labour Law
• Energy
• Fund Finance
• Initial Public Oﬀ erings
• International Arbitration
• Litigation & Dispute Resolution
• Merger Control
• Mergers & Acquisitions
• Pricing & Reimbursement
www.globallegalinsights.com
Published by:
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3305362


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
