--- Page 1 ---

 
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
http://www.bryanhousepub.org
 
 
Volume 4 Issue 1 2022
4 Issue 2 2022
The Influence of Cryptocurrency on International 
Relations and Sanctions
 
Hvidson Kamala Khas
 
 
Abstract: This study is focused on the analysis and impact of cryptocurrencies on international relations and illicit activities along 
with the lawmakers' approach towards illicit activists and crimes that have picked up since the creation of Cryptocurrencies. The 
massive growth of cryptocurrencies can be noticed by seeing ATMs, wallet users, and businesses accepting Cryptocurrency. While this 
new technology is being developed, various authorities have been forced to set regulations, given the expansive growth of 
Cryptocurrency over the years. There are multiple terminologies used to describe Cryptocurrency from one jurisdiction to another. One 
of the most common actions identified across jurisdictions is the Government-issued notices issued to the Central Banks to regulate 
cryptocurrencies. These warnings issued by various countries majorly center around the fact that cryptocurrencies may create a root for 
illegal activities such as money laundering, terrorism, and other organized crimes. Cryptocurrencies are favorable due to their trade 
speed, cost, and security. The total market cap peaked at more than $2 trillion on November 4th, 2021, with up to 7, 616 
Cryptocurrencies, according to investing.com. There are instances where cybercriminals made hostages extort payment in terms of 
Cryptocurrencies. Most crowd funding is scams and takes away the money. There are claims that as soon as cryptocurrencies became 
popular and valuable, hackers and other criminals started to demand crypto instead of PayPal or Western Union. This high demand for 
crypto in the crime world emerged as a significant concern for bankers and governors, with criminals exploiting digital financial 
services to perpetrate money laundering and other types of crimes.  
 
Keywords: Cryptocurrency, Economy, International Relations, Fraud, International Sanctions, Banking 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The world of the monetary system started to change in early 
2008 when Bitcoin was introduced as a digital currency by 
Satoshi Nakamoto. Nakamoto launched this worthless 
currency for mining in 2009, and the first transaction was 
processed in 2010, two slices of pizza for 10, 000 Bitcoins in 
Florida, USA. As of 2021, Bitcoin covers most of the market 
as the mother of the coins and there have been many 
blockchains introduced with over 4, 000 of coins and tokens 
in the market. Bitcoin has come over $682 billion in market 
capacity and has reached a price break of 60k per coin. The 
rapid jump in the price of Bitcoin made it of great interest to 
investors worldwide. In addition to the drastic market value, 
the simplicity of trade through technology and electronic 
payments helped the popularity of digital currency 
investments [1].  
 
These virtual currencies operate on a decentralized system, 
making it difficult to determine the user’s identity and 
location. Considering the lack of detecting capability, this 
blockchains system offers a level of anonymity not seen in 
other 
laundering 
activities. 
This 
system 
is 
further 
complicated in that it is not possible to be audited and this 
freedom to transfer and make payments worldwide makes 
this channel attractive for money-launderers whose goal is to 
move and withdraw funds without any detection. Bitcoin 
does not use any central servers; it uses no servers and 
instead operates on a consensus network of computers 
internationally. The global network restricts access to users’ 
information by involving thousands of computers to verify 
bitcoin transactions. The lack of central servers and the 
presence of cross-border payments utilizing a decentralized 
system that often segments transactions and originates from 
several different countries make it unwieldy for law 
enforcement to locate and access individual users. Without 
access to this information, there is no possible means to 
provide oversight to cryptocurrencies.  
 
This decentralized system altered many lawmakers around 
the 
world 
as 
eluding 
regulations 
peaked 
up. 
Cryptocurrencies enable many violators to evade law 
enforcement and regulation limits in various manners, such 
as taxation and various illicit activities. In addition, these 
decentralized cryptocurrencies and their rapid value growth 
present a reasonable means for nations, corporations, and 
individuals to undermine economic sanctions imposed by 
the United States. Furthermore, to prevent this new 
upcoming instability in international relations and control of 
crimes, illicit activities, and political invasions, the world's 
commanders 
are 
looking 
into 
the 
United 
States' 
enforcements on cryptocurrencies.  
 
2. Purpose of Study 
 
While the term "cryptocurrency" is relatively new in the 
world of finance, it has already had a significant impact on 
trading, 
investments, 
and 
monetary 
systems. 
Cryptocurrencies are now one of the most discussed topics 
in the past few years, and because of the essential factors 
and features, they will be regularly used in the 
future.compared to the traditional monetary system, 
cryptocurrencies are introducing new online security 
features, investment opportunities, and future careers to the 
new generations. With all that cryptocurrencies are bringing 
to the new monetary system and economy; society must 
study and research this technology.  
 
This new technology will be providing a variety of careers 
such as blockchain developers, cryptocurrency developers, 
miners, analysts, software developers, and many other 
professions to the public. In addition to career development, 
blockchains technology influences various industries, and it 
can reduce operational costs and help eliminate cross-border 
payments.  
 
Online security is another good reason to study blockchain 
and cryptocurrencies. Blockchains are introducing new 
67
DOI: 10.53469/jgebf.2022.04(02).10


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 2 ---

 
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
http://www.bryanhousepub.org
 
 
Volume 4 Issue 1 2022
4 Issue 2 2022
digital safety standards, and this decentralized approach 
makes it one of the safest online payment methods. In 
addition, the blockchain system is entirely independent, self-
regulated, and decentralized; thus, there is no need to 
involve a third party to process information manually.  
 
Cryptocurrency 
projects 
have 
become 
popular, 
and 
increased is that blockchains bring a reasonable investment 
opportunity. When society studies cryptocurrencies and 
blockchains, they can start investing early, using their 
knowledge, and profiting from it. In addition, the 
cryptocurrency market is being gradually analyzed and 
regulated. These regulations will prevent illicit activities and 
frauds; thus, market volatility may not be an issue in the 
future. All this study and regulation will bring stability into 
the market, and traders will add another asset to their 
portfolios and diversify their investments.  
 
With all security and features of cryptocurrencies, it is hard 
for governments and financial institutions to ignore this 
technology. As a result, the governments are increasingly 
interested in digital coins, looking for possible ways of 
regulation and institutionalization. Moreover, several 
countries, including China, Russia, Singapore, Sweden, and 
Japan, 
have 
already 
created 
their 
cryptocurrencies. 
Therefore, a brief understanding of cryptocurrencies and 
blockchain's 
features, 
advantages, 
and 
disadvantages 
becomes necessary. This study explores major research 
questions; What are blockchain and cryptocurrencies, and 
their economy today? What are different governments' 
approaches 
towards 
cryptocurrencies? 
How 
are 
the 
cryptocurrencies crimes rates changing? The study's overall 
design incorporates all the main topics discussed herein with 
a comprehensive review of existing literature to ascertain the 
core of the discussion.  
 
3. Cryptocurrencies in Today’s Economy 
 
Nowadays, due to digitalization and improvement in tech, 
electronic payment systems are widely being used, and 
bitcoin adds some new features to these transactions, making 
this digital coin favorable and, meanwhile, debatable. After 
accomplishing this popularity, Bitcoin has been widely 
spoken to be accepted as a payment system. While this 
acceptance of digital currency has been introduced to the 
monetary system, many governments and lawmakers are 
trying to challenge this transition [2].  
 
Bitcoin is a person-to-person coin; it is decentralized and 
can be traded simply through online blockchain platforms. 
Most 
importantly, 
any 
transactions 
through 
these 
blockchains are not backed, tracked, posted in any banking 
system, and will not be audited. These unique features and 
simplicity to trade without international policy enforcements 
have 
pinched 
the 
attention 
of 
the 
public 
and 
policymakers.governments have identified and practiced 
different enforced policies regarding blockchains. While 
many governments still have not announced any sort of 
critical enforcement on digital currency trading, there are 
some government-imposed limits on trades through the 
blockchains [3].  
 
The 
enormous 
value 
growth 
and 
investments 
in 
cryptocurrencies has taken the world's attention. Before 
debating the impact of cryptocurrency on the economy, the 
relation between these two essential manners should be 
discussed. Numerous daily international trades are being 
processed through different currencies with different 
exchange 
rates. 
Sometimes 
trading 
with 
traditional 
currencies has some losses for traders due to floating 
exchange rates and transaction costs. While on the other 
hand, cryptocurrencies are almost free from taxation charges 
and have no transaction costs. While cryptocurrencies are 
still youthful, the impact of blockchains on the economy is a 
controversial debate between investors and economists [4].  
 
Cryptocurrencies have various effects on the political, 
economic, cultural, and social life of humankind. Today, 
digital currencies are not becoming a substitute for 
traditional money. Still, they are replacing it with the new 
formation of funds, which governments cannot unseen. 
Moreover, since there is no strict regulations, guarantee, or 
backup to protect cryptocurrency buyers and traders, a 
massive risk is in ambush for buyers, and all trading carries 
risk. However, this does not change the fact that blockchain 
tech intends to change the financial system in the world. Yet, 
the financial world will change, shifting currencies to an 
electronic form of money. As of today, bank institutions and 
governments do not accept cryptocurrencies. They even set 
restrictions on them and limited all transactions from their 
debit and credit cards to block crypto resources. For 
decades, cash was the king for corruptions and lawbreakers, 
seeing that legal transactions are being mirrored or required 
to pay taxes. However, studies showed that eliminating cash 
usage can diminish criminal activities [5]. Moreover, Björn 
Eriksson, Swedish police chief, presented Sweden's success 
in fighting crime by reducing cash from circulation and 
moving to digital banking [6]. Additionally, Riksbank 
reports back up the idea of how much crime is linked to the 
usage of cash in Swedish society [7]. Contrary to other 
payment methods like deposit accounts, digital coins cannot 
be controlled or predicted by any other party except the 
sender and receiver. Accordingly, cryptocurrencies are the 
new kings for criminals since they replace cash and create 
new anonymous payment methods.  
 
The creation and spreading of cryptocurrencies come with 
various 
risks 
and 
regulatory 
issues. 
Because 
of 
unpredictability and decentralization, they could facilitate 
crime and money laundering. Because cryptocurrencies 
grant an opportunity for cash flow among individuals 
without governmental or any third parties' participation and 
no border limitation, one can say that the amount of market 
demand sets the price of them. Yet, central banks have no 
power to control the market directly. Still, they can reduce 
the need by setting limitations and restrictions for their 
customers, which will result in reducing demand and the 
price eventually. Moreover, the battle between central banks 
and the crypto market has already started since cash-out 
crypto coins are banned in countries such as Egypt, Turkey, 
Algeria, Vietnam, and etc., and highly limited by many 
central banks such as Swedish and Indian’s banks [8].  
 
Based on what has been argued so far, one can say that since 
cryptocurrencies are decentralized and anonymous along 
with being independent of banks, governments, and 
68


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 3 ---

 
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
http://www.bryanhousepub.org
 
 
Volume 4 Issue 1 2022
4 Issue 2 2022
governmental institutes, eliminating blockchain from public 
life cannot be seen as a favorable condition. However, as 
much as this is true, bank institutes can limit the usage of 
cryptocurrencies and dramatically affect their price by 
setting restrictions for their customers who trade in crypto. 
Thus, sooner or later, if the use of cryptocurrency enhances 
to a broader era, it may eliminate the ability of central banks 
to enforce and carry monetary policy, which leads 
economists to the question of whether central banks must 
develop their digital currencies or not. Authorities began 
regulating blockchain platforms after the high number of 
illicit activities across the world. While all governments 
have the goal of enforcing policy on blockchains platforms 
in common, they have different approaches towards this 
regulation. This different policy enforcement among the 
global authorities made cryptocurrencies a vague market for 
investors at the same time, an unstable platform for the 
international trade violators.  
 
4. The United States of America Regulations 
for Cryptocurrencies 
 
The surge in international cryptocurrency investment was 
started while the authorities did not have major control over 
cryptocurrency transactions. With increased studies of 
global policies bodies, many countries will look to the 
United States to regulate their cryptocurrency market. 
However, the United States' government agencies have 
varying 
policies 
across 
the 
federal 
entities, 
while 
cryptocurrencies laws vary from state to state. In addition, 
the U. S. has the second-largest volume of Bitcoin, nearly 
fourteen percent, and retrospectively set up no regulatory 
guidelines compared to other major powers. This lack of a 
uniform regulatory framework has not made the U. S. well 
suited to welcome the global adventure of cryptocurrencies.  
 
Without a compact uniformed system of rules, many 
blockchain startups avoid the U. S. due to the implications of 
future taxations. This avoidance started in the United States; 
there are different political and economic approaches for 
cryptocurrencies among the states and federal governments. 
The various regulations among the U. S. states appear to be 
in contrast. Some states do not consider Cryptocurrency 
legal, while others have found a way to encourage 
Cryptocurrency 
and 
promote 
blockchains. 
Initially, 
Cryptocurrency was not a legal trade, but now, there are few 
exceptions. While the benefits of this technology are still 
cynical, several policymakers have acknowledged the 
regulation risk of the currency. In contrast, others have 
passed legislation to increase investment in technology. The 
United States Department of Treasury does not consider 
Cryptocurrency as legal. Since 2013, the network has 
deemed it a substitute for currency and considers it a money 
transmitter. In contrast, the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
counts Cryptocurrency as property and has declared tax 
guidance for the cash. In March 2014, the IRS announced 
that Bitcoin and any other cryptocurrency would be taxed as 
"property, " not currency. IRS explained further that every 
individual or group trading in Cryptocurrency should keep a 
record of cryptocurrency sales and purchases. In addition, 
they are entitled to pay taxes for the gains on every sale, 
purchase, and mined made through cryptocurrency platforms 
and mined cryptocurrencies [9].  
State Regulation wise, the Wyoming legislature has 
exempted Cryptocurrency from property taxation. In 
addition, the state of Colorado passed a bill to require 
blockchains to keep track of transactions to provide for 
governmental purposes. Moreover, other states like Arizona 
and 
Georgia 
have 
started 
accepting 
taxes 
on 
a 
cryptocurrency exchange in November 2018. While some 
American states like New Mexico and California have 
issued warnings about cryptocurrency investment and New 
York has restricted the currency [10]. Regarding exchange, 
the trade regulations of Cryptocurrency are also considered 
as an uncertain legal territory. Only one regulatory body, 
Security 
and 
Exchange 
Commission 
(SEC), 
knows 
Cryptocurrency as a security measure. In March 2018, it 
declared that it would apply security law for digital wallets 
and exchanges. In contrast, the Commodities Future Trading 
Commission (CFTC) follows a friendly approach for bitcoin 
traders as it allows traders to trade publicly. Although there 
is no consistent legal approach for Cryptocurrency in the 
USA, cryptocurrencies are still under discussion in several 
American regions; many investors and large companies in 
the USA such as Tesla are taking a high interest in this 
investment [11].  
 
5. Canada Regulations for Cryptocurrencies 
 
Canada allows the use of Cryptocurrencies, although they 
are not considered as legal tender in Canada. The Consumer 
Agency of Canada announced that digital currencies could 
be exchanged to buy goods on the internet and stores that 
process 
cryptocurrencies 
aside 
from 
the 
regular 
cryptocurrency exchanges [12]. Canada’s tax laws apply to 
digital currency transactions, and all digital currencies are 
subject to the Income Tax Act [13]. The Canada Revenue 
Agency (CRA) has characterized cryptocurrency as a 
commodity and not a government-issued currency. In 
addition, while filing taxes, any gains, or losses from selling 
or buying digital currencies must be reported [13].  
 
The Canadian parliament legislation made Canada become 
the first country to approve cryptocurrency regulation in 
anti-money laundering as an Act to Implement Certain 
Provisions of the Budget Tabled. This legislation amends 
Canada’s Proceeds of Crime (Money Laundering) and 
Terrorist Financing Act to include Canadian cryptocurrency 
exchange. Recently, the Ontario Securities Commission has 
been enforcing strict laws on one of the largest digital asset 
trading platforms, Binance. The legislation forces the 
platforms to comply with specific Canadian security 
legislation that requires additional registration. However, 
unlike the United States, Canada did not cause this 
registration first, entitled Binance authorities to update 
customers agreement that concerns crypto traders in Ontario 
[14].  
 
6. European 
Union 
Regulations 
for 
Cryptocurrencies 
 
Since January 2020, cryptocurrencies and blockchains 
became the European Union (EU) target after the Fifth Anti 
Money Laundering Directive. This act means that EU 
members and financial institutions consider trading in 
69


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 4 ---

 
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
http://www.bryanhousepub.org
 
 
Volume 4 Issue 1 2022
4 Issue 2 2022
cryptocurrencies as a legal trade as long as traders meet 
standard 
reporting 
requirements 
(aml/ctf). 
However, 
ultimately to this decision, members decided to enumerate 
cybercrime under the money laundry predicate offenses. 
Along with this new legislation, cryptocurrencies and 
blockchains 
are 
determined 
as 
qualified 
financial 
instruments. In addition to this law, no bank, institution, or 
company is prohibited from holding or trading crypto assets. 
As the European Union is actively seeking further legislation 
on cryptocurrencies, members are concerned about the risks 
bound with private digital currencies. As much as this is 
true, it is that central banks of EU members are exploring to 
issue their crypto and digital currencies [15].  
 
Among all, Sweden, being the most cashless country 
globally, has decided to create its own digital currency, said 
Riks Bank. Cecilia Skingsley, the deputy governor of 
Sweden, claims that Sweden needs to be at the leading edge 
of creating a new payment system as the usage of cash is 
declining in Sweden faster compared with other countries. 
Skingsley also mentioned that “The less those of us living in 
Sweden use banknotes and coins, the clearer it becomes that 
the Riksbank needs to investigate whether we should issue 
electronic money as a complement to the money we have 
today” [16].  
 
7. Cryptocurrencies and Illicit Activities 
 
Over the last few decades, the United States has passed 
several acts to fight money laundry. Per the Money 
Laundering Control Act of 1986, money laundering is a 
federal crime. Bank Secrecy 9 Act of 1970 has established 
the requirements for record-keeping and reporting to identify 
the volume, source, third parties involved, and the 
destination of transactions [17]. Customer Identification 
Program (CIP) is another set of regulations aimed at fighting 
money laundering by basically requiring due diligence from 
companies to identify their customers. The requirements of 
CIP to identify customers include collecting the name, date 
of birth, address, and identification number information 
from them [18].  
 
Due to the anonymity of cryptocurrencies, many private 
entities and businesses use this system to transfer funds for 
personal purposes outside the reach of traditional banking 
systems. Thus, cryptocurrencies have become a haven for 
people and businesses to conceal their illegal activities such 
as gambling, selling counterfeit goods, selling child 
pornographic content, and etc. It is needless to mention that 
certain activities in order to burden the payable tax are differ 
from tax evasion; some well-known examples of that could 
be tax planning, tax saving, and tax avoidance. Nevertheless, 
one can say that the mentioned activities are considered as 
legal activities, contrary to international tax law, tax evasion 
is considered as fraud and illegal activity. In the context of 
tax fraud, most of the tax evasion cases which are implicated 
with cryptocurrency are intentional. Moreover, most usage 
of cryptocurrency in tax fraud is related to income tax [19].  
 
 
 
Figure 1: Blockchain Fraud and Thefts (Source: CipherTrace Cryptocurrency Intelligence)  
 
According to CipherTrace’s Cryptocurrency Crime and 
Anti-Money Laundering Report released in 2021, major 
crypto thefts, hacks, and frauds totaled $0.7 billion in 2021 
which has decreased by $1.2 billion annual value in crypto 
crimes compare to 2020. Massive exit scams have 
dominated cryptocurrency crimes in the last four years. In 
2019, the fraud and thefts value reached $4.5 billion which 
is the peak in cryptocurrency’s crime and money laundering 
[20].  
 
As the US attorney Chad Meacham claimed, “Transacting in 
virtual currencies does not exempt businesspeople from 
paying income taxes”. Moreover, Christopher Altemus the 
special agent of IRS said that “As digital currencies continue 
to emerge as an investment option for taxpayers, we must 
continue to increase the pressure on anyone who tries to take 
advantage of their investors and taxpayers through fraud and 
tax evasion. The great work from both the Dallas and Los 
Angeles IRS-CI field offices firmly puts that pressure on 
these two cybercriminals and serves as a warning to others” 
[21]. One can say a legal way of tax avoidance and delaying 
tax payments in a legal manner is to hide the capital in 
governmental bonds, which gives the opportunity to the 
holder to not be required to pay tax on the capital if the 
bonds is held. As it seems, cryptocurrencies can be an 
alternative option for individuals and firms to hide their 
capital and avoid tax payments, however, the anonymity of 
crypto makes it impossible to determine or estimate the 
70


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 5 ---

 
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
http://www.bryanhousepub.org
 
 
Volume 4 Issue 1 2022
4 Issue 2 2022
capital as soon as they turn it into crypto. Additionally, due 
to the anonymity of its transaction, one can transfer the 
capital and makes it not possible for the IRS to trace and 
evaluate the firm’s or individual's total assets [19].  
 
8. Crypto-currencies and Financial Sanctions 
 
Financial sanctions are becoming a vital foreign policy tool 
by the world powers and an alternative way for an economic 
war instead of a military war. For the United States, the 
Treasury Department's Office of Foreign Asset Control or 
OFAC administers economic sanctions. OFAC was 
officially created in 1950 to respond to China entering the 
Korean War to block or freeze all Chinese and North Korean 
assets within U. S. jurisdiction [22]. The United States 
government has imposed financial sanctions against 
individuals and corporate entities in Russia, Myanmar, 
Nicaragua, Venezuela, North Korea, Cuba, and Iran. These 
economic sanctions target exports' prohibition, including 
minerals, oil, coal, iron, and agricultural products. Import 
sanctions include aviation fuel, oil, military equipment, 
transport vehicles, luxury goods, and communications 
equipment [23].  
 
Sanctions have different sequences of impact on the 
financial revenue of the targeted firms and industries, and 
this impact extends to the country's political structure. To 
this end, we focus on sanctions imposed on Iranian 
corporations and how Iran has overcome this hardship since 
1979 when the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial 
Telecommunication (SWIFT) started banning some Iranian 
banks from accessing its widely used cross-border payment 
services. Many of these sanctions have been imposed in 
response to its nuclear and ballistic missiles programs. Due 
to the intensity of the length and diversity of the sanctions, 
Iran suspended much of its nuclear uranium enrichment 
efforts and resumed negotiation with the United States and 
five other world powers about its nuclear program [24].  
 
The growing prevalence of virtual currency as a payment 
method brings more significant exposure to sanctions risks 
like the risk that an economically sanctioned person or 
country in an authorized jurisdiction might be involved in a 
virtual currency transaction. Due to the anonymity and ease 
of payment, many sanctioned countries took a step to use 
cryptocurrency to evade the global financial sanctions 
targeting their sanctioned trades transactions. Accordingly, 
the virtual currency industry is increasingly critical in 
preventing sanctioned persons and countries from exploiting 
virtual currencies. OFAC sanctions compliance requirements 
apply to the virtual currency industry in the same manner as 
they do to traditional financial institutions, and there are 
civil and criminal penalties for failing to comply [25]. The 
guidance issued by OFAC today provides an overview of 
OFAC sanctions requirements. In addition, it provides 
examples of compliance best practices for operators in this 
space, 
including 
technology 
companies, 
exchangers, 
administrators, miners, and wallet providers, as well as more 
traditional financial institutions that may have exposure to 
virtual currencies or their service providers. If ignored or 
mishandled, sanctions risks are vulnerabilities that can lead 
to violations and subsequent enforcement actions and harm 
U. S. foreign policy and national security interests [25].  
The U. S. Department of the Treasury issued the first 
designation of virtual currency exchange for facilitating 
transactions 
for 
violators 
in 
October 
2021. 
This 
announcement introduces additional steps that help the 
virtual currency industry prevent exploitation by sanctioned 
persons and other illicit actors. These actions are part of 
President Biden Administration's focused, integrated effort 
to counter the ransomware threat. The Department of the 
Treasury leads a collaborative approach to counter ransom 
ware attacks, including public-private partnerships and close 
relationships with international partners [26]. "Ransom ware 
actors are criminals who are enabled by gaps in compliance 
regimes across the global virtual currency ecosystem, " said 
Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally Adeyemo. 
“Treasury is helping to stop ransomware attacks by making 
it difficult for criminals to profit from their crimes, but we 
need partners in the private sector to help prevent this illicit 
activity. ” said Deputy Secretary of the Treasury Wally 
Adeyemo [26].  
 
9. Summary and Conclusion 
 
In conclusion, the extent to which cryptocurrency regulation 
will parallel that of physical currencies remains uncertain. 
Cryptocurrencies are favorable due to their speed, cost, and 
the market capacity has rapidly reached more than $2 
trillion. Since this decentralized investing technology is 
becoming more popular and valuable, hackers and 
cybercriminals started to demand crypto instead. For this 
decentralization regulations should target cryptocurrencies 
and other intermediaries linking cryptocurrency and the real. 
These exchanges should be controlled by central authorities 
and can be the target of regulatory enforcement. The 
intangible nature of cryptocurrency does not fit neatly within 
any current. Cryptocurrency has many current and potential 
uses that regulators must consider. To address this issue, it is 
recommended that regulators look to cryptocurrency to 
consider specific regulations and anyone who intends to 
transact with cryptocurrency should therefore do so with the 
utmost caution. This will ensure the effectiveness of existing 
regulations is not undermined by the existence of 
unregulated cryptocurrency-based products and ensures 
regulations have considered the risks and specific concerns.  
 
Lastly, to circumvent regulatory arbitrage and the 
undermining of a single country’s regulatory efforts, it is 
recommended as a desirable outcome that regulations be 
consistently adopted as standards internationally. After all, 
some questions will remain unanswered since the world is 
unsure about the act and consequences of cryptocurrencies. 
For instance, Will monetary policies work as they do today? 
Will central banks have monetary policy power in the 
economy while blockchains take over the money? What if 
the world's most traded cryptocurrency went to zero? This 
paper shined a light on a relatively new topic. Further 
research needs to be conducted since some gaps remain 
questionable out of the spotlight. Further study on a global 
scale can be beneficial for both governmental institutes as 
well as private sectors. Moreover, this research has had a 
significant focus on money laundering, sanctions, tax 
evasion, and individual usage of cryptocurrency, however, 
more aspects of cryptocurrency such as international 
relations and security, must be studied through further 
71


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
--- Page 6 ---

 
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
Journal of Global Economy, Business and Finance (JGEBF)     ISSN: 2141-5595
http://www.bryanhousepub.org
 
 
Volume 4 Issue 1 2022
4 Issue 2 2022
research and the updated regulations on this broad field and 
technology of cryptocurrencies.  
 
References 
 
[1] 
Litwack, Seth. "Bitcoin: Currency or Fool's Gold: A 
Comparative Analysis of the Legal Classification of 
Bitcoin. " Temp. Int'l & Comp. LJ 29 (2015): 309.  
[2] 
Agarwal S. Note: Bitcoin transactions: A bit of 
financial privacy. Cardozo Arts & Entertainment Law 
Journal.2016; 35: 175.  
[3] 
Hobson JE. Blockchain and Cryptocurrency-Two 
Road 
Converge. 
MULTISTATE 
TAX’N 
& 
INCENTIVES.2018; 28: 40.  
[4] 
Everett C. The Cryptocurrency Investing Guide: How 
to Invest and Trade Cryptocurrencies for BIG Profit. 
R&C Publishing; 2018.  
[5] 
Warwick D. Reducing Crime by Eliminating Cash. 
National Council on Crime and Delinquency, Davis, 
CA. Published online December 1993: 49. https://eric. 
ed.gov/?id=ED377114 
[6] 
Eriksson 
B. 
KORTEN 
PÅ 
BORDET. 
kontantupproret. 
Published 
online 
2014: 
20. 
https://www.kontantupproret. 
se/wp-
content/uploads/2014/11/Korten. 
På. 
Bordet. 
print_.pdf 
[7] 
Crimes linked to cash have fallen. Riksbank. 
Published November 7, 2019. https://www.riksbank. 
se/en- 
gb/payments--cash/payments-in-
sweden/payments-in-sweden-2019/swedish-
payments-are-secure-and-efficient/security-in-
sweden-is-high-from-an-international-
perspective/crimes-linked-to-cash-have-fallen/ 
[8] 
Nokleholm, Beate Adelaida, and Gina Vangen 
Kviseth. Regulation of Cryptocurrency: An Analysis 
of the Proposed Markets in Crypto-Assets Regulation 
Emphasizing on the Issuer of Stablecoin. MS thesis. 
Handelshøyskolen BI, 2021.  
[9] 
Co NO. Regulation of Cryptocurrency in Various 
Jurisdiction across the World. SSRN Electronic 
Journal. Published online May 7, 2021: 10. doi: 
10.2139/ssrn.3841589 
[10] Goforth CR. U. S. Law: Crypto is Money, Property, a 
Commodity, and a Security, all at the Same Time. 
Journal of Financial Transformation, Forthcoming. 
Published online November 16, 2018: 11.  
[11] Goforth, Carol R. "US law: Crypto is money, 
property, a commodity, and a security, all at the same 
time. 
" 
Journal 
of 
Financial 
Transformation, 
forthcoming (2018).  
[12] Yadav, Aman. "Cryptocurrency in India: to Ban or 
not to Ban. " Aman Kumar Yadav, ‘Cryptocurrency 
in India: To ban or not to ban’ (The RMLNLU Law 
Review Blog, 2 March 2021), available at: 
https://rmlnlulawreview.com/2021/03/02/cryptocurre
ncy-in-india-to-ban-or-not-to-ban (2021).  
[13] Cumming, Douglas J., Sofia Johan, and Anshum 
Pant. "Regulation of the crypto-economy: Managing 
risks, challenges, and regulatory uncertainty. " 
Journal of Risk and Financial Management 12.3 
(2019): 126.  
[14] Bill C-31, An Act to Implement Certain Provisions of 
the Budget Tabled in Parliament on February 11, 
2014 and Other Measures, Second Session, Forty-first 
Parliament, 62-63 Elizabeth II, 2013-2014, Statutes of 
Canada 2014 Ch.20,  
[15] EUR-Lex-52020PC0593-EN-EUR-Lex. Europa. eu. 
Published September 2020. https://eur-lex. europa. 
eu/legal-
content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX%3A52020PC0593 
[16] Duxbury C. Sweden’s Central Bank Considers Digital 
Currency; Deputy governor says nation’s sharp 
decline in cash usage may make it among first to 
adopt new system. Wall Street Journal. Published 
online 
December 
2016. 
https://www.proquest.com/docview/1839606589?pq-
origsite=primo&accountid=11754 
[17] Yalaman, 
Gamze 
Öz, 
and 
Hakan 
Yıldırım. 
"Cryptocurrency 
and 
Tax 
Regulation: 
Global 
Challenges for Tax Administration. " Blockchain 
Economics 
and 
Financial 
Market 
Innovation. 
Springer, Cham, 2019.407-422.  
[18] “Customer Identification Program-Overview. ” FDIC: 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 24 Aug.2007, 
p.47 
www.fdic.gov/regulations/examinations/bsa/ffiec_cip.
pdf.  
[19] Babcak V, Romanova A, Vojnikova I. The use of 
cryptocurrencies for tax evasion and tax fraud. 
University 
of 
Wroclaw.2015; 
2: 
253-263. 
https://www.researchgate. 
net/publication/301200553_The_use_of_cryptocurren
cies_for_tax_evasion_and _tax_fraud 
[20] Campbell-Verduyn, Malcolm. "Bitcoin, crypto-coins, 
and global anti-money laundering governance. " 
Crime, Law and Social Change 69.2 (2018): 283-305.  
[21] Founders of Crypto ICO Plead Guilty to Tax Evasion 
After 
Raising 
$24 
Million 
from 
Investors. 
www.justice.gov.  Published October 12, 2021. 
Accessed 
November 
2, 
2021. 
https://www.justice.gov/usao- 
ndtx/pr/founders-
crypto-ico-plead-guilty-tax-evasion-after-raising-24-
million-investors 
[22] "Basic Information on OFAC and Sanctions. " N. p., 
n. 
d. 
Web.9 
Nov.2021 
<https://home. 
treasury.gov/policy-issues/financial-
sanctions/faqs/topic/1501>.  
[23] Borszik, Oliver. "International sanctions against Iran 
and Tehran's responses: political effects on the 
targeted regime. " Contemporary politics 22.1 (2016): 
20-39.  
[24] Alfoneh, A. (2010): “The Revolutionary Guards’ 
Looting of Iran’s Economy,” Discussion paper, 
American Enterprise Institute.  
[25] Clautice, Thomas, "Nation State Involvement in 
Cryptocurrency and the 
Impact to 
Economic 
Sanctions" (2019). Economic Crime 
Forensics 
Capstones.43.  
[26] Scoular, 
Jesse. 
Cryptocurrency: 
Illicit 
Uses, 
Legislation, Regulation, and the Burden on Law 
Enforcement. Diss. Utica College, 2021.  
72


--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
