OCTOBER 2024  1
Bringing Blockchain Due Diligence  
into Focus Alongside Uptick in  
Strategic Dealmaking
SCOTT BENNETT, BENJAMIN GRUENSTEIN, DAVE KAPPOS,   
EVAN NORRIS, RYAN PATRONE, ELAD ROISMAN AND   
SASHA ROSENTHAL-LARREA, CRAVATH  
JASON TRAGER, FTI TECHNOLOGY
Renewed momentum surrounding blockchain and digital assets indicates that the space is returning to  
a more stable trajectory. Following a slowdown in industry deal volume in the second half of 2022 and 
2023, signals now point toward growth in joint ventures and mergers and acquisitions (“M&A”) activity 
for the year ahead. 
This activity is expected to include consolidation in certain digital asset sectors and renewed organic  
and inorganic investment by traditional financial players in the digital asset space through the remainder 
of 2024 and into 2025. There will likely also be an uptick in investments and strategic partnerships. 
Organizations in industries such as entertainment, telecommunications and retail may also increasingly 
look to develop blockchain and web3 platforms for a range of customer offerings and new business 
models, spurring further adoption of use cases outside the financial sector.
Still, TradFi institutions and other organizations looking to grow and invest in the digital asset space 
will do so in the face of lingering worries over the business and legal uncertainty as well as regulatory 
scrutiny that will likely persist throughout this developing industry, particularly in the United States. 
Such uncertainty and scrutiny underscore the importance of conducting robust technical, legal and 
business due diligence to evaluate risk and alleviate concerns in major strategic deals. 
With the possibility of enhanced scrutiny, it is imperative that parties looking to enter the digital asset 
space through acquisitions, joint ventures or other strategic transactions understand the relevant 
technologies and markets as deeply as possible. This means analyzing the current state of the business  
and its historical conduct, including its relationship to digital assets and the concentration of its assets,  
as well as possible regulatory issues. 
Given the commercial, regulatory and technical complexities involved in the digital asset space, devising 
a diligence plan and conducting due diligence require specialized expertise from outside counsel, 
consultants and accountants who understand the industry’s nuances. These advisors will help acquiring 
companies examine commercial risks that arise in this sector, such as the commingling of customer 
assets, loss or compromise of digital keys, market volatility and the potential for manipulation or illicit 
activity. They will also clarify the potential opportunities and benefits of a target’s strategy ( e.g., faster 
transactions, increased transparency, efficiency and improved accessibility) so they can be adequately OCTOBER 2024  2
leveraged. While the involvement of experts is critical for any acquiring company, organizations outside 
of the digital asset space are likely to have less familiarity with the industry and therefore require more 
guidance throughout the diligence process. 
With the support of the right experts and an understanding of industry nuances that may arise, 
dealmaking teams should evaluate the following key elements as part of conducting robust due diligence 
for blockchain and digital asset deals.
A. INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
Digital asset and blockchain protocols can raise complex copyright, trademark and patent questions. 
When examining potential target companies that are active in blockchain, digital assets and web3, 
buying organizations must consider the protections and contracts that targets have implemented around 
their intellectual property (“IP”) to avoid inheriting infringements or investing in IP that may be or 
may become compromised. 
A particular challenge of IP in blockchain projects is separating out IP owned by the target, IP owned  
by the holders of any digital assets developed by the target and IP owned by any relevant decentralized 
community (such as a decentralized autonomous organization, or DAO). Careful attention should be 
paid to the allocation of rights in each piece of IP to understand potential risks posed by various rights 
holders.
Understanding the technical structure of digital assets and the methods by which they are created and 
transacted is a business necessity. Buying organizations should examine the architecture of each asset  
and the relevant blockchain network to determine their suitability for targets’ use cases. Proper due 
diligence should also include research on industry players who pose a potential threat to the IP of a  
target company.
Copyrights and trademarks
For diligence targets with image- and brand-driven digital assets—such as creators behind non-fungible 
token (“NFT”) collections—acquiring parties should understand the possible copyright and trademark 
protections for such assets and ensure they are appropriately registered, including with the U.S. 
Copyright Office and U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (“USPTO”). Copyrights and trademarks serve 
different but synergistic functions when it comes to digital asset protection. Copyrights may be used to 
protect original works associated with an NFT, while trademarks offer an additional way to protect 
against forgeries and unauthorized monetization by third parties. Together, these protections build 
integrity for the collection and protect the project as a whole.
Beyond NFTs, blockchain technology consists of software and other content that may be copyrightable. 
Many blockchain projects rely on open-source software, so acquiring parties should carefully diligence 
the proprietary or open-source licensing schemes under which the target’s software is developed. The 
presence of copyleft licenses, for example, may compromise the commercial potential of the technology. OCTOBER 2024  3
Additional license schemes, including the Business Source License, which permits copying for only  
non-production purposes for a certain period and later converts to an open-source license within four 
years, have also gained popularity. Diligence teams should ensure that the target company’s software 
development and usage comply with such licensing requirements and that the target’s software products 
are adequately protected. 
Patents
Certain blockchain technologies and web3 applications are also patent-protectable. Unlike traditional 
business methods, which are difficult to patent due to eligibility hurdles, blockchain technologies may 
be technical systems directed to more than an abstract concept and thus may be more likely to be viewed 
as patent-eligible subject matter when compared to TradFi business methods. The USPTO has granted 
more than 10,000 patents for blockchain-based inventions to date, and the number of patent 
infringement suits related to blockchain-related patents has also increased. Diligence teams should 
investigate and understand in depth the technical mechanisms, as well as the target company’s patent 
portfolio, and, if any, anticipate any associated patent litigation risk. 
B. DIGITAL ASSET GOVERNANCE & OWNERSHIP STRUCTURE
Custody and ownership of assets
Verifying assets under custody (or the claims that a target has made about the volume or value of assets  
it has under custody) is particularly challenging, as the process for doing so is different from standard 
approaches for validating individual ownership of currency and traditional assets. The diligence process 
must include validation of how custody has been defined, who has control of the assets on chain and off 
chain, the accounting processes involved and the governance controls around custodied assets. Doing so 
is typically a highly technical assessment of underlying infrastructure. Verifying the ownership of such 
assets may also prove to be particularly challenging for digital asset targets with products that focus on 
privacy or with complex organizational structures.
Technical considerations
The technical considerations that may be relevant to a due diligence team are fact specific and dependent 
on the company and the product or service at hand. Generally speaking, however, diligence teams 
should ensure that they have a clear understanding of the type of digital asset being offered, use cases for 
such digital asset, the methods by which outside users may interact with the asset, the asset’s distribution 
system, the target’s smart contract infrastructure, the programmability of such digital asset and any 
policies, protocols or internal controls limiting programmability and how the asset functions on the 
blockchain at a technical level, including its path from the target to the investor or end user.OCTOBER 2024  4
C. REGULATORY COMPLIANCE
Diligence teams should assess whether a target’s compliance teams, policies, procedures and tools are 
adequately robust to ensure compliance with applicable regulatory requirements. Depending on an 
organization’s industry, operations and location, it may be subject to an array of federal, state and foreign 
regulatory requirements. These requirements could include, among other things, obligations arising 
under securities and commodities laws, sanctions restrictions, transaction monitoring requirements, 
anti-money laundering (“AML”) and know-your-customer (“KYC”) controls, anti-fraud and 
corruption measures and data security requirements. Of course, each target organization is different, 
and it is important that diligence teams consult with counsel to determine which of these requirements 
may apply in a specific instance.
U.S. securities laws
A common issue facing target companies in this space is whether the digital assets related to their 
business are securities, and, if so, whether those digital assets have been offered or sold in violation  
of securities laws and whether the target companies have violated securities laws. Without adequate 
compliance with the applicable securities laws, web3 target companies may be subject to a number  
of legal issues and potential liability, including from regulators. 
The U.S. federal securities laws apply to the initial offering and sale, as well as subsequent offers and 
sales, of digital assets if such digital assets are securities. Whether a digital asset is a security under the 
Securities Act of 1933 generally depends on whether the digital asset is an investment contract. A digital 
asset is generally considered a security by virtue of being an investment contract if it satisfies the 
four-prong test that the U.S. Supreme Court articulated in its landmark 1946 decision, SEC v. W.J. 
Howey Co.1 The Howey  test applies to any contract, scheme or transaction, regardless of whether it 
resembles a traditional security.
The Securities Act establishes a transaction-based, mandatory disclosure regime designed to provide 
investors material information relating to securities offerings that do not fit within specified 
exemptions. The Securities Act makes it unlawful for issuers to offer or sell securities, including digital 
assets that qualify as securities, unless the offer and sale: (i) is pursuant to a registration statement filed 
with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) or (ii) qualifies for an exemption from 
registration. Additionally, under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, certain issuers of securities must 
file periodic disclosures with the SEC. These disclosures are designed to provide investors material 
information about the issuer, including its financial condition, operations and governance.
Moreover, in the United States, a digital asset platform that offers trading in digital asset securities and 
meets the definition of an exchange must either register with the SEC as a national securities exchange 
or operate pursuant to an exemption from registration, including as an alternative trading system. 
1 328 U.S. 293 (1946). Under Howey , a non-traditional asset (such as a digital asset) is a security if: (i) there is an 
investment of money, (ii) in a common enterprise, (iii) with the expectation of profits, (iv) to be derived from the efforts of 
others. All four factors must generally be met to be classified as a security. See  also Reves v. Ernst & Young , 494 U.S. 56 
(1990) (resulting in the so-called “Reves test”, infrequently applied to digital assets in comparison with Howey  but 
relevant to certain digital assets that resemble “notes”). OCTOBER 2024  5
The current chair of the SEC has stated (but not speaking on behalf of the SEC) his belief that “of the 
nearly 10,000 tokens in the crypto market . . . the vast majority are securities.”2 Recent enforcement 
actions and guidance by the SEC highlight the agency’s focus on tokens and digital assets, although  
there have been entities that have challenged its authority and jurisdiction in court.3 A comprehensive 
regulatory framework specific to digital assets offered, sold or resold in the United States, or to persons 
in the United States, does not exist. Instead, U.S. regulators apply traditional regulatory and legal 
frameworks to digital assets. Such frameworks require fact-specific analysis, which generally leaves 
market participants to gauge adequate compliance based on prior regulatory or judicial determinations 
and regulators’ public statements.4  
Given the status of the digital asset markets, issuers of digital assets may be subject to a number of legal 
issues and potential liability, including from SEC enforcement. These issues could include individual 
liability and monetary damages, as well as operational impediments caused by orders to cease and desist 
from further violations of U.S. securities laws and regulations. It is crucial for diligence teams to validate 
a digital asset issuer’s compliance with the U.S. securities laws and regulations as well as assess 
compliance for those that provide services to the issuer if, for example, they are distributing tokens on 
behalf of the issuer.
In addition, targets may have financial commitments or other obligations to early investors, such as 
obligations pursuant to simple agreements for future tokens or equity. Prior transactions, previous or 
planned initial coin offering activity and prior associations are likely to impact deal terms and deal value, 
and sometimes even viability. Understanding these early in the process is critical to supporting risk 
mitigation, accurate valuation and negotiations.
Commodities laws
Diligence teams should similarly take care to ensure that companies trading in digital asset commodities 
or derivatives are in compliance with the rules and regulations governing such instruments. The 
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (“CFTC”) regulates U.S. derivatives markets, including  
the trading of certain commodity derivatives products such as futures, options or swaps. Certain digital 
assets, including some virtual currencies, may qualify as commodities under the Commodity Exchange 
Act of 1936, which is enforced and administered by the CFTC.5 Individuals, firms and exchanges 
engaged in commodities derivatives trading must adhere to Commodity Exchange Act requirements, 
including registration as a regulated exchange or intermediary.
2 See https://www.sec.gov/news/speech/gensler-sec-speaks-090822.
3 See, e.g., SEC v. Ripple Labs, Inc., Case No. 1:20-cv-10832-AT-SN (S.D.N.Y. July 13, 2023) (holding that the Howey  test 
was not met where a digital token was sold programmatically, i.e. , via a trading algorithm, on a blind bid/ask basis—where 
the purchaser did not know the seller and the seller did not know the purchaser—or where the token was distributed as 
compensation in exchange for services).
4  For example, some market participants have sought No-Action Letters from the SEC’s Division of Corporation Finance 
requesting confirmation that the offer or sale of a given digital asset will not violate U.S. securities laws (or have 
structured their digital assets conservatively to ensure they fit within the parameters of existing SEC No-Action Letters).
 5 The Commodity Exchange Act defines “commodity” broadly to include all “goods and articles, … and all services, rights, 
and interests … in which contracts for future delivery are presently or in the future dealt in.” 7 U.S.C. § 1a(9). Generally, 
the CFTC’s regulatory jurisdiction is limited to derivatives—the agency’s authority over the underlying commodity (spot) is 
limited to anti-fraud/manipulation. OCTOBER 2024  6
The CFTC has exercised its enforcement authority after determining that trading in certain digital 
assets is subject to its authority. Additionally, federal district courts have held that some digital assets, 
including certain cryptocurrencies, are commodities subject to CFTC jurisdiction. Acquiring parties 
should investigate whether target companies that trade digital assets are subject to the Commodity 
Exchange Act and CFTC rules and regulations.
The Bank Secrecy Act and AML obligations
Under the Bank Secrecy Act, web3 companies may be required to implement controls to ensure that 
their digital asset platforms are not exploited for money laundering or terrorist financing. Diligence 
teams should determine whether a target is required to comply with the Bank Secrecy Act and, if so, 
ensure that adequate AML protections are in place.
The Bank Secrecy Act requires financial institutions to implement an AML program that includes KYC 
procedures and various reporting and record-keeping requirements.  Financial institutions subject to  
the Bank Secrecy Act are required to implement adequate measures to verify customer identities, 
monitor transactions and report suspicious transactions. A compliant AML program must be in writing 
and include, at minimum, (i) the development of internal AML policies, procedures and controls;  
(ii) a designated compliance officer; (iii) an ongoing employee training program; and (iv) independent 
audits to ensure the program functions adequately.
In addition to traditional banks, broker-dealers and futures commissions merchants, the Bank Secrecy 
Act’s definition of financial institutions applies to “money services businesses”, a type of non-bank 
financial institution that includes money transmitters ranging from remittance providers to centralized 
digital asset exchanges.6 In 2019, the U.S. Treasury Department’s Financial Crimes Enforcement 
Network (“FinCEN”), the agency with primary enforcement responsibility for the Bank Secrecy Act, 
published a detailed guidance titled, “Application of FinCEN’s Regulations to Certain Business Models 
Involving Convertible Virtual Currencies.” Under that guidance, money transmitters include 
exchangers, which exchange virtual currency for real currency or other virtual currency, and 
administrators, which have authority to put into or withdraw virtual currency from circulation.7  
With limited exceptions, money transmitters are required to register as money services businesses  
with FinCEN and have the same reporting, record-keeping and AML obligations as other financial 
institutions.8 
Over the last few years, FinCEN and the CFTC have brought multiple enforcement actions against 
web3 companies for alleged violations of the Bank Secrecy Act, including for failure to implement  
an adequate AML program and failure to register as a money services business, regulated exchange  
6 The Bank Secrecy Act obligations of money transmitters under FinCEN rules arise independently of Bank Secrecy Act 
obligations of certain businesses subject to SEC and/or CFTC jurisdiction ( e.g., broker-dealers and futures commissions 
merchants). Diligence teams should consider whether a target is required to have implemented an adequate AML 
program under any of these bases.
7 FinCEN Guidance, “Application of FinCEN’s Regulations to Certain Business Models Involving Convertible Virtual 
Currencies,” at 13 (May 9, 2019).
8  FinCEN, “Interagency Interpretive Guidance on Providing Banking Services to Money Services Businesses Operating in the 
United States,” at 2 (Apr. 26, 2005).OCTOBER 2024  7
or intermediary. The U.S. Department of Justice has also brought criminal charges against officers of 
companies that willfully failed to register as a money services business and implement adequate AML 
programs.
Given regulatory scrutiny of AML programs in this industry, diligence teams should assess whether a 
target is or may be subject to regulation by federal or state agencies. Where such obligations exist, due 
diligence teams should ensure that such targets have met any registration, record-keeping and AML 
obligations. Where appropriate, diligence teams may need to conduct an AML risk assessment, 
investigate customer due diligence procedures and review the use of proprietary or in-house blockchain 
analytics tools. 
That said, significant uncertainty remains as to how AML principles apply to digital assets services.  
Due diligence teams should take particular care to validate the claims of a target that holds itself out as 
exempt from Bank Secrecy Act obligations. Some targets may rely on geo-blocking to exclude U.S. 
customers and thus avoid U.S. jurisdiction. In such instances, diligence teams should ensure that the 
geo-blocking measures are effective at restricting access by U.S. customers, including those using  
virtual private networks or anonymizing browsers. Given this regulatory uncertainty, acquirors should 
be especially diligent to understand the technical underpinnings of target companies and assess whether 
they may give rise to regulatory obligations. If so, diligence teams should ensure that targets have 
implemented adequate AML and customer due diligence procedures.
U.S. sanctions
Blockchain technology can help accelerate the distribution of digital assets across global markets. With 
such a potential for global reach, compliance with U.S. sanctions laws should be a key focus for acquiring 
parties. The U.S. currently maintains comprehensive sanctions against Iran, North Korea, Syria, Cuba 
and the Crimean, Donetsk and Luhansk regions of Ukraine, as well as extensive, though not 
comprehensive, sanctions on individuals and entities in Venezuela and Russia. These sanctions are 
administered and enforced primarily by the U.S. Treasury’s Office of Foreign Assets Control 
(“OFAC”).  OFAC also has authority to designate individuals and entities as Specially Designated 
Nationals pursuant to U.S. sanctions, antiterrorism and anti-drug-trafficking laws. Although each 
sanctions program differs, U.S. law generally prohibits U.S. persons from engaging in transactions, 
directly or indirectly, that involve a person or entity in a sanctioned country or on the Specially 
Designated Nationals list. U.S. law also generally prohibits individuals and entities (including non-U.S. 
persons) from facilitating, or causing a U.S. person to engage in, a prohibited transaction.
OFAC has made clear that the agency views its sanctions authorities as applying with full force to web3 
systems and transactions. OFAC has thus put even highly decentralized platforms on notice that, in the 
agency’s view, the services offered by such platforms must comply with U.S. sanctions, antiterrorism and 
anti-drug-trafficking laws. 
Due diligence teams should ensure that targets are also in compliance with such laws. For instance, 
where appropriate, diligence teams will want to review the robustness of a target’s transaction 
monitoring program and how rapidly it responds to alerts, as well as evaluate its methods to blacklist 
addresses and procedures for mandatory reporting.OCTOBER 2024  8
D. POTENTIAL CONTINGENT LIABILITIES
Without adequate attention to identifying and evaluating contingent liabilities, acquirors may 
inadvertently buy into hidden risks. Such risks can arise from a target’s failure to comply with the 
regulatory requirements described above, which can lead to investigations of or proceedings against  
the target. Similarly, the target’s contracts can be another source of potential contingent liabilities and, 
in extreme cases, can even have material impacts on the acquiror’s existing businesses. 
Regulatory issues
Diligence teams should determine whether a potential target is subject to regulatory oversight or is 
likely to invite regulatory scrutiny, including investigation. Acquisition targets may be subject to 
ongoing investigations by regulators, among them the SEC, CFTC, OFAC, FinCEN and state 
regulators like the New York Department of Financial Services, for potential legal and regulatory 
violations. A target may also become involved as a third party in investigations and proceedings between 
a regulator and another company. In the course of these investigations, regulators may request company 
documents, witness interviews and written responses to questions. The subjects of these investigations 
may need to dedicate substantial resources to comply with the requests, cooperate with regulators and 
minimize legal and financial risks. 
Regulatory investigations may result in decisions by regulators to commence enforcement actions in 
administrative proceedings or in federal or state court. These actions implicate the risk of sizeable 
judgments and, where willful misconduct is involved, criminal liability. As with regulatory 
investigations that publicly settle, public court filings and orders may also carry reputational risks. 
If diligence teams determine that a potential target is or is likely to be subject to regulatory scrutiny, 
diligence teams should request to meet with counsel for information about any investigation or inquiries 
from regulators as well as facts learned by the company from internal reviews. Additionally, diligence 
teams should also determine whether any agreements to toll applicable statutes of limitations are in 
place. Based on the information they receive, diligence teams should assess the potential financial, legal 
and reputational risks associated with any ongoing investigations.
Litigation
Litigation risks that apply to traditional targets also apply to targets in the digital asset space. This is  
true for web3 companies, including highly decentralized companies, even when they do not fit the 
traditional corporate mold. Additionally, judicial orders that result from litigation initiated by regulators 
can have serious collateral consequences for a business’s ability to operate. Depending on the business, 
potential targets may also face class action litigation. 
Diligence teams should thus inquire about any potential or ongoing litigation involving the target and 
assess the potential outcomes, risks, consequences and likelihood of a material impact on such target’s 
financial performance, reputation, legal status or operations.OCTOBER 2024  9
E. CONTRACTS
Acquirors should take care to review material contracts and agreements of a target company, regardless 
of its industry, to identify any risks or potential liabilities arising from such contracts and agreements.  
In addition, a target’s contracts may contain provisions that are implicated by the contemplated 
transaction or, in extreme cases, may have material impacts on the acquiror’s existing business.
Legal contracts
In order to assess if any potential liability exists related to a potential or ongoing breach of contract or 
counterparty dispute, an acquiror’s diligence team should inquire as to whether there are any existing, 
expected or alleged contractual breaches by the target company or any disputes between the target 
company and any of its counterparties. Due diligence teams should also request and review a target 
company’s material contracts and agreements. 
As part of this review, an acquiror’s diligence team should focus on (i) any contractual provisions that 
may be implicated as a result of the acquiror’s contemplated transaction, including change-of-control  
or anti-assignment provisions; and (ii) any contractual restrictions that could undercut the strategic 
rationale for the contemplated transaction and/or are drafted so broadly that, by their terms, they could 
apply to the acquiror’s existing business. At the outset, it is crucial that diligence teams understand the 
nuances of the proposed transaction structure, the scope of the acquiror’s existing business and the 
acquiror’s plans for the target’s business after the proposed transaction is completed, as each of these will 
influence the type of contractual provisions that may be implicated by, or have a material impact on, the 
proposed transaction.  
Smart contracts
Target companies in the digital asset space often use smart contracts in their business operations. A  
smart contract is a set of functions in code built on top of and secured by blockchain technology that can 
execute “agreements” without human intervention. These “agreements” are effectively self-executing 
if-then programs—if a predetermined thing occurs, the smart contract will automatically execute a 
predetermined action. Acquirors should assess the validity and feasibility of smart contracts, as well as 
the underlying risks and vulnerabilities in the participants and infrastructure of the target’s smart 
contracts. 
F. TOP EXECUTIVES AND KEY PERSONNEL
Headline cases in the digital assets industry over the past two years have underscored just how much the 
missteps and misconduct of high-ranking individuals can expose a company and its investors. Evaluation 
of the culture, behaviors and governance decisions of the people in power within a target is a critical step 
in the diligence process.OCTOBER 2024  10
G. CORPORATE STRUCTURE
Companies in blockchain and digital assets industries will often build and fund or otherwise have 
associations with entities that exist solely to support a specific blockchain ecosystem. Without proper 
diligence, this can bring exposure to unforeseen legal risks. Consideration should be given to any 
foundations, DAOs and other third-party partnerships a target is involved in to ensure those activities 
are managed with appropriate attention to governance, compliance and contractual obligations.
Organizational documents
In this space, a target’s organizational structure may be more complicated than a traditional 
organizational structure, as potentially complex digital asset distribution structures may create the  
need for sub-governance entities ( e.g., DAOs) and more complicated legal structures ( e.g., offshore 
entities, legal wrappers). Particular attention should therefore be paid to the form of corporate entity 
(e.g., C-Corporation, Limited Liability Company); the jurisdiction in which a parent company and  
any subsidiaries, if applicable, have been formed; and the existence of any sub-governance entities. 
Compliance paradox
Centralized governance assists with compliance, yet it raises concerns under securities laws. As 
discussed, digital assets that are determined to be investment contract securities under Howey  are 
required to be registered with the SEC or otherwise qualify for an applicable exemption. Digital asset 
creators may be incentivized to decentralize their corporate structures in order to seek to avoid the  
need for SEC registration (or exemption), among other reasons. However, per The Bank Secrecy Act 
and AML obligations, certain compliance regulations may require digital asset protocols to conduct 
KYC checks and screenings, which could require some degree of centralization. Moreover, 
decentralization may in some circumstances make a target less attractive to a strategic acquiror from  
a business perspective. It is important for diligence teams to be aware of these potential issues and 
understand both legal and business risks.
CONCLUSION
Depending on the outcomes of a diligence exercise, acquiring institutions and investors may need to 
make adjustments to their plans. The implications of due diligence findings may include adjustments  
or potential adjustments to purchase price, changes to the acquisition contract ( e.g., reps, disclosure, 
covenants, conditions, termination provisions, indemnities), modifications of transaction structure  
and/or adjustments to the roadmap for integration and post-closing operations. 
Any legal team familiar with the M&A process understands the importance of due diligence. In deals 
within the digital asset space, additional complex and technical considerations, each requiring close 
attention, are introduced. Conducting a detailed, expert-led technical and legal examination of 
potential risks and the nuances unique to digital assets companies and models will position acquiring 
companies and investors to avoid surprises and enhance the ultimate value of the deal.OCTOBER 2024  11
cravath.com11 cravath.comNEW YORK
 Two Manhattan West  
375 Ninth Avenue 
New York, NY 10001 
T+1-212-474-1000  
F+1-212-474-3700LONDON
  CityPoint  
One Ropemaker Street 
London EC2Y 9HR 
T+44-20-7453-1000  
F+44-20-7860-1150WASHINGTON, D.C.
 1601 K Street NW 
Washington, D.C. 20006-1682  
T+1-202-869-7700  
F+1-202-869-7600
This publication, which we believe may be of interest to our clients and friends of the firm, is for general information only.  
It should not be relied upon as legal advice as facts and circumstances may vary. The sharing of this information will not 
establish a client relationship with the recipient unless Cravath is or has been formally engaged to provide legal services.
© 2024 Cravath, Swaine & Moore LLP. All rights reserved.